It was late at night on March 7, 2016, when Ghazala Siddiqui heard the phone ring and hurriedly reached for it, eager to hear the voice of her son. An indecipherable torrent of words spewed from the breathless caller.
‘‘ThisisrecruitSiddiqui.IhavearrivedsafelyatParrisIsland.Pleasedonotsendanyfoodorbulkyitemstomeinthemail.Iwillcontactyouin7to9daysbyletterwithmynewaddress.Thankyouforyoursupport.Goodbyefornow.’’
Silence.
‘‘Raheel?’’ she said. The phone was dead. The call lasted less than five seconds. In her darkened living room in Taylor, Mich., a suburb of Detroit, Ghazala worried. The previous morning, Raheel, a 20-year-old Marine Corps recruit, left for boot camp on Parris Island, S.C. He had promised to call his parents when he arrived, and Ghazala and her husband, Masood, had been waiting by the phone. But the call, when it came, was strange, with an almost deafening noise in the background. Ghazala couldn’t be sure it was even him. In the morning, she phoned Raheel’s recruiter. ‘‘No one knows my son’s voice better than me,’’ she said. ‘‘That didn’t sound like my son.’’
The Siddiquis, who emigrated from Pakistan in the 1990s, hadn’t wanted their precious oldest child, and only boy, to join the Marines. Slender and unathletic, Raheel had always seemed most content designing video games on his computer. He graduated ninth in the class of 2014 from Taylor’s Harry S. Truman High School, a valedictorian with his pick of colleges, including a full academic scholarship to Michigan State. After months of deliberation, he decided on the University of Michigan’s Dearborn campus, where he enrolled in September 2014, lured by its new program in robotics engineering. But the following July, after his freshman year, Raheel drastically changed course, announcing to his family that he had decided to leave college and enlist in the Marines.
Ghazala didn’t understand. ‘‘You’re smart, you’re intelligent — why?’’ she pleaded with him. Raheel tried to placate her. It was a ‘‘golden opportunity,’’ he told his parents. ‘‘After three years in the Marine Corps, I can do anything.’’
Over the next eight months, Raheel prepared for the rigors of boot camp, installing a pull-up bar in the basement, drinking protein shakes, lifting weights, learning to swim. He told his parents he would still try to follow Muslim dietary laws and stay away from anything haram. ‘‘It’s going to be good, Mom,’’ he told her, before saying goodbye on March 6. ‘‘Don’t worry. I’m ready.’’
That call was the last time she heard her son’s voice.
Raheel Siddiqui was born and raised about 20 miles southwest of Detroit, in the vast suburban-industrial wasteland known as Downriver. There are three military recruiting stations in the area, once a hub of auto manufacturing which is now, like much of the Rust Belt, a region of Best Buys, Taco Bells and Walmarts. Taylor, a city of some 61,000 people, is both the largest and one of the poorest of the Downriver communities: a pocket of mostly white and African-American residents, nearly a quarter of whom live below the poverty line.
Raheel was raised in public housing and spent his high school years intent on escaping his shabby hometown. ‘‘He always wanted challenges,’’ says Jerry Abraham, a former guidance counselor at Truman High whom Raheel frequently enlisted to help him find the hardest classes. In pursuit of a perfect G.P.A., Raheel had virtually no social life, though he had a naïve optimism unusual for a teenager. ‘‘He saw the world as nothing but a wonderful place,’’ says Karey Lee, Raheel’s supervisor at a nearby Home Depot, where he worked part time on the customer-service desk. ‘‘I don’t think he knew that hatefulness existed, to be honest.’’
Military recruiters were fixtures at Truman High. The Marines, the most selective of the armed services, came to campus twice a week. ‘‘They targeted the kids that were more college-oriented and capable of being successful,’’ says Abraham, whose office was in the same building as the school’s R.O.T.C. program. They were also quick to reject students who failed to meet their standards, which include scores in the top third on the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (Asvab) test and no history of serious drug use, crime or tattoos that the Marines consider ‘‘undesirable.’’ Like many of his classmates, Raheel took the Asvab and scored high. With his talents, drive and rigid focus, he would very likely have struck recruiters as the ‘‘golden goose,’’ as one former Marine put it.
But the military never really interested Raheel. College was his goal. He polled his friends on Facebook: Where should he go for the most challenging engineering program? Michigan Tech? Michigan State? The University of Toledo? Raheel often crowdsourced big decisions. It wasn’t enough for him to choose; he had to make the best choice, says his classmate and friend Gabriel Goforth, who recalls that from time to time a squeaky anxiety would creep into Raheel’s voice. Failure seemed to terrify him. ‘‘He’d stress over the little things to make it perfect,’’ he says.
The University of Michigan-Dearborn was the most prestigious school to which Raheel applied, and in April 2014 he was accepted and given a $2,000 scholarship. It was not the full academic scholarship he was offered by Michigan State, but with the hefty financial aid he would receive, it was ‘‘technically a full free ride,’’ Raheel announced on Facebook. The assistance, however, came with strings: Should his grades dip below a C average, he wouldn’t receive any more money until they went back up.
Raheel enrolled in Michigan’s honors program, a special track requiring students to maintain a 3.2 G.P.A. He assumed it would be easy. Lee, his boss at Home Depot, estimated that Raheel probably worked about 20 hours a week his freshman year, though it never occurred to her to ask why he needed to work so many hours if school was paid for. ‘‘He never talked about what he did with the money,’’ she says. ‘‘I assumed he was doing well at school because, I mean, he was a genius.’’
After high school, Raheel had told his mother she should stop working odd jobs and let him contribute to the family’s income. Massood didn’t make much at an auto-parts factory, and Raheel was concerned about how the family would pay for his 16-year-old sister to attend college. ‘‘Let’s face it,’’ he confided to a friend, ‘‘she’s not going to get a full scholarship, and my parents can’t afford to send her, so I have to make sure she goes.’’
It was a lot for an 18-year-old. His grades began to suffer. By December, Raheel was getting Cs. Worried that he might fail chemistry, he texted his friend Nathan Pykor, also a student at the Dearborn campus: ‘‘I just feel too STRESSED over all of my classes because I haven’t dedicated enough time.’’
‘‘You’re fine,’’ Pykor, who had known Raheel since high school, replied. ‘‘You know that it’s nearly impossible to get a 4.0 in college.’’
‘‘I’m not fine,’’ Raheel texted back.
His solution, he told Pykor, was to withdraw from his classes and ‘‘start fresh’’ in the spring, which he did, finishing the semester with three As and a B. But as Pykor told me, withdrawing from his classes very likely meant Raheel would owe the University of Michigan the money it had given him to attend classes in the fall. It also could have jeopardized his aid package for the following year.
According to a recent Pew research study, millennials are the most educated generation in American history. They’re also on track to carry the most debt. The Marine Corps understands this. Pitching the Marines as the smart alternative to college debt is one facet of the corps’s annual $80 million marketing budget. Another casts the Marines as simply the smart path to college itself. ‘‘Every Marine is a student,’’ reads one pamphlet, citing the many educational benefits available to those who serve. Though other branches of the military use similar enticements in recruiting, for the Marines, this approach is relatively new: For decades, the corps focused more on the prestige of being accepted into its ‘‘elite’’ ranks. But the post-Sept. 11 generation doesn’t see military service as particularly prestigious, the corps’s longtime advertising agency, J. Walter Thompson, concluded after conducting a study in 2012 on how to sell the Marines to millennials. Continuing to sell the corps as gung-ho warriors wouldn’t entice recruits beyond the Marines’ traditional base of white, evangelical, Southern conservatives, they found. Presenting the Marines instead as global do-gooders attracted kids across the political, racial and socioeconomic spectrum. Thompson described its new marketing strategy as the merging of ‘‘Rambo and Bono.’’
On June 16, 2015, Raheel posted on Facebook for the first time in a while. ‘‘I’m thinking about joining the military. Maybe the Marines.’’ Just three weeks later, on July 8, he signed his enlistment papers and entered the Marines’ Delayed Entry Program, which, lasting anywhere between a month and a year, is designed to stagger the number of recruits the corps can train at any one time. It’s also intended to indoctrinate ‘‘poolees,’’ as they are called, into the culture of the Marines. ‘‘The D.E.P. is all about selling the Kool-Aid,’’ says a lance corporal who also enlisted in the Marines in 2015, after his freshman year. (‘‘I decided I didn’t like college enough to justify all that debt,’’ he told me.) ‘‘You meet every Saturday, and they’ll tell you stories, do little workouts,’’ he says, ‘‘tell you some lies.’’ Like ‘‘ ‘Yeah, I’m always in my room playing Xbox,’ ‘There’s all this time to party’ ’’ — anything that will appeal to college kids.
Raheel spent close to eight months in the D.E.P. under the tutelage of his recruiter, who the Siddiquis said told them that Raheel was his most motivated poolee. Ghazala marveled at the changes in her son, who now woke each day at 4 a.m. to spend hours at the gym. Any doubts his mother had about his education were assuaged by Raheel’s own assurances: He said he had been told that he could continue his education while serving, and that, having chosen a technical specialty, working on Marine aircraft, he might not even have to fight unless he wanted to. (In fact, Marines I spoke to said it was nearly impossible to pursue an education during their first enlistment; once deployed, every Marine has to be prepared to fight if suddenly under attack.) At Raheel’s urging, Ghazala visited the recruiting office in Taylor, where she says that recruiters assured her that Raheel’s safety wouldn’t be an issue.
‘‘I feel like they’re really good at lying,’’ says the lance corporal, who was sold on the corps by recruiting videos that presented the Marines as ‘‘badasses’’ on humanitarian missions to save refugees or deliver food and water. Raheel told his parents that enlisting in the Marines would put him on the fast track to join the F.B.I., which, to their total surprise, had become his life’s dream. A few weeks before he left for boot camp, Raheel stopped by Truman to tell some of his old teachers about his plans. Abraham pressed him on his decision, but Raheel’s mind was made up.
‘‘Be careful,’’ Raheel’s friend Hussein Chehab, who worked with him at Home Depot, says he told him before he left. ‘‘Just . . . watch yourself. You don’t know what kinds of people are down there. You don’t know how other people think.’’
There is an eeriness to Parris Island, particularly at night and early in the morning, when a dense mist rises from the swamps, twisting through the Spanish moss and drifting out toward the flat expanse of the base. Lying just off the South Carolina coast in Port Royal Sound, the island is four miles long and three miles wide, with 3,265 acres of dry land, surrounded by salt marsh. The base, which is one of two official Marine Corps training depots (its West Coast counterpart is in San Diego), is made up of a series of quads, each composed of identically nondescript barracks and administrative buildings ringing manicured fields. Overhead, a snaking maze of aboveground iron pipes pumps out whistling steam.
History, or what Marines call ‘‘knowledge,’’ lives on Parris Island. Everything about the place is an elegy to the corps, from the statue of Marines lifting the flag on Iwo Jima to the street names, each one its own small lesson: Boulevard de France, Cuba Street, Wake Boulevard, Saigon Drive. Inside the Recruit Chapel, a series of stained-glass windows depicts chapters of Marine heroism and sacrifice. In one, a platoon of Marines rests in the hand of God. In another, a ragtag band of soldiers and sailors stands before the gates of heaven guarded by stoic, crisply dressed Marines.
The Marines are America’s smallest conventional military force, with just 184,000 active-duty troops. They are also the military’s most insular warriors — with the possible exception of Navy SEALs — whose tight bond, or ‘‘esprit de corps,’’ grows out of the codes, traditions and reverence for suffering that Marines believe set them apart from civilians and all other military branches.
Central to this identity is the uniquely miserable experience of boot camp, where since World War II, as the historian Aaron O’Connell writes in his 2012 book, ‘‘Underdogs: The Making of the Modern Marine Corps,’’ ‘‘Recruits [have] learned in ways they would not forget that what made Marines exceptional was their ability to endure more pain than members of their sister services.’’ ‘‘Making’’ Marines, as the corps calls recruit training, is a three-part process, with boot camp being the first and most grueling test. Its purpose, unlike Army boot camp, is not to train war-fighters; for Marines, that comes in the second and third phases of training. Boot camp is meant to create the ‘‘warrior spirit,’’ as the corps puts it, over three months of group indoctrination intended to strip recruits of individuality and, through repeated exposure to pain and physical challenge, condition them to accept and perform violence.
In his 1984 memoir, ‘‘First to Fight,’’ the esteemed Marine lieutenant general Victor Krulak, known as Brute, spoke of the ‘‘almost mystical alchemy’’ that happens during boot camp, whose shared hardships he saw as ‘‘the genesis of the enduring sense of brotherhood that characterizes the corps.’’ But the lines between hard training and abuse can blur. Like every other branch of the military, the Marine Corps has official strictures against hazing, which it defines as any unauthorized verbal or physical conduct of a ‘‘cruel, abusive, humiliating, oppressive, demeaning or harmful’’ nature. The Marines have nonetheless investigated hundreds of hazing allegations in the past five years alone. (The particulars of the hazing incidents in this article were taken largely from redacted reports prepared by the Marines in the course of their investigations. Details like names and dialogue were provided by eyewitnesses and other recruits.) ‘‘There is a natural tension between an organization that trains people for lethality and the larger culture,’’ a Marine reserve officer told me. ‘‘Inside the culture, you’re supposed to be able to take a punch and give a punch and crush a skull. Outside, this is not something that’s valued.’’
The bedrock of Marine tradition is a long-ago era when buff, male and mostly white combat Marines launched amphibious early-morning assaults on enemy beaches armed with M1 rifles and Ka-Bar knives. Today’s far less homogeneous troops roll into battle in armored Humvees or tanks, with sophisticated high-powered weaponry and thermal-imaging goggles. Many never leave their base at all, waging war remotely while operating a joystick or writing code. In many ways, the Marines have become indistinguishable from the Army.
Adapting to these harsh truths hasn’t been easy for the corps, whose current and former officials, with some exceptions, were reluctant to speak openly about these challenges except on condition of anonymity. ‘‘The Marines have a purpose, and it’s a militant purpose,’’ one senior officer says. ‘‘We are an organization grounded on the physical, but wars are not as physical anymore. The character of war has evolved a lot from the early 20th century. The question is: Has our force evolved? I don’t think it has.’’
One misty night in December, I stood in front of a building on Parris Island called the ‘‘receiving barracks’’ and watched as a group of new, exceedingly young-looking recruits debarked from a bus and were immediately thrust into the alternate reality of the corps. A burly drill instructor in khaki, a wide-brimmed hat shading his face, approached. ‘‘GET ON THE YELLOW FOOTPRINTS!’’ he bellowed. The kids scurried to a long line of footprints painted on the asphalt leading up to the entrance, where, as the instructor commanded, they stood at attention. Then they streamed toward the building, up the few short steps and toward the silver hatches, a pair of large metal doors that only recruits are allowed to pass through, and only once, the day they arrive on the island.
Once inside the doors, the mystical journey from civilian to Marine known as the Transformation begins. It’s pandemonium. Drill instructors scream from every direction as the kids, scrambling to individual metal desks, are ordered to fill out administrative paperwork, signaling their completion by raising their right hand, with pen, above their heads. From there it’s on to the phone bank, where, with instructors bawling at them to finish, recruits are told to make three- or four-second calls home, reading as fast as they can from a five-line script taped to the phone box:
‘‘Thisisrecruit___.IhavearrivedsafelyatParrisIsland.Pleasedonotsendanyfoodorbulkyitemstomeinthemail.Iwillcontactyouin7to9daysbyletterwithmynewaddress.Thankyouforyoursupport.Goodbyefornow.’’
The rest of the intake process, known as ‘‘receiving,’’ follows over the next few days: buzz cuts, boots, uniforms, shots. They are given physical-fitness tests, fed what most describe as truly awful food and ordered to perform seemingly meaningless tasks, like standing at attention while holding their heavy gear in front of them until their arms give out, or sitting cross-legged and motionless on the floor for hours. Some Marines I interviewed recalled being kept awake for nearly two days after arriving. ‘‘All you can think about is sleep,’’ one said. ‘‘Those are the main tools: fear and sleep deprivation.’’
Drill instructors, or D.I.s, are revered on Parris Island, where they roam the base with a special aura. ‘‘Nobody will counter them,’’ one senior Marine official told me. ‘‘Without them, there is no Parris Island.’’ Some D.I.s are not much older than the recruits. Only a small fraction have been to war. Almost all adopt the mien of an infantry grunt, though in truth, most D.I.s, like most Marines, aren’t combat troops but rather part of the corps’s expanding cast of supporting players: mechanics, air traffic controllers, technicians, clerks. Some Marines I spoke with described boot camp as a performance: The lead actors are the D.I.s, men and women who for the first time in their professional lives are embodying the macho warrior archetype they were taught to venerate as recruits.
To qualify for D.I. training, a Marine must have finished at least one term of enlistment and be given a clean psychological bill of health as determined by what the Marine officials insist is rigorous testing aimed at weeding out those Marines suffering from PTSD. They must also complete an 11-week drill-instructor school, where, as one former officer puts it, they are taught to ‘‘mold these guys into killers.’’ D.I. school, by all accounts, is almost as intense as boot camp. This is by design; every moment of a drill instructor’s schedule is tightly scripted and charted on what the corps calls its ‘‘training matrix.’’ ‘‘The system is very unforgiving on the D.I.,’’ says Gary Lee, a retired Marine sergeant major who helped design the training program in 1995. ‘‘They never get a break from their responsibilities.’’ During a 12-week training cycle, D.I.s spend almost all their time on their feet. Their voices croak with exhaustion and strain. They barely sleep.
The stress of the job, coupled with the near-unbridled power given to drill instructors, creates a dangerous alchemy. This has been particularly true on Parris Island, whose violent ‘‘shadow culture,’’ as it has been described to me, exceeds San Diego’s. Since 2014, there have been 24 official hazing investigations on Parris Island, half of them substantiated. There is a perspective on the base ‘‘that somehow you can make a better Marine by beating the shit out of him,’’ says the retired Marine general Charles Krulak, Brute Krulak’s son. ‘‘I have argued consistently that it’s not true — you do not make a better Marine by treating them that way; in fact, it’s totally against what we as a Marine Corps stand for. But it’s a mentality that has existed down there for so long.’’
In 1995, Charles Krulak became the commandant of the Marine Corps and decided this culture had to change. Krulak and his team came up with what they called the transformation process, which overhauled boot camp to incorporate an agenda based on the Marines’ ‘‘core values’’ — honor, courage, commitment — into every aspect of basic training. The goal, Krulak says, was to create ‘‘a smarter, more selfless, more adept and more educated Marine.’’ It channeled the violence of Marine Corps training into specific moments, the most important being the Crucible, a grueling 54-hour physical and psychological endurance test that comes at the end of the training cycle, and was intended as the final and, in Krulak’s mind, only arbiter of whether a recruit is ready to become a Marine.
The transformation process managed to curtail hazing for a few years, says Krulak, who retired from the corps in 1999. ‘‘As I recall, the number of courts-martial had a significant decrease during those four or five years when I was commandant. Problem was, after I left we had a changing world. I think in all these years of war, we lost a bit of our focus,’’ he says. ‘‘There are people who think war entitles them to behave any way they want.’’
As new waves of recruits passed through Parris Island after Sept. 11, the Marines rushed to meet the demands for troops in Iraq and Afghanistan. Some of the reforms Krulak had put in place began to erode. Without the structure to support them, it was easy for some drill instructors to fall back on the violent methods they themselves experienced at boot camp. In 2005, a film crew from a South Carolina TV station inadvertently caught a terrified-looking recruit named Jason Tharp being hit by a drill instructor at the Parris Island pool. The following day, Tharp drowned during water-survival training; his drill instructor was charged with negligent homicide (and later acquitted). In 2011, a Parris Island drill instructor was sent to the brig for more than a year after he was found guilty of ordering one of his recruits to record a video of himself masturbating on the D.I.’s cellphone. The next year, a trainee received second- and third-degree burns to his buttocks requiring skin grafts after his drill instructor ordered him ‘‘to perform unauthorized exercises under an upside-down laundry bin on a floor covered in bleach,’’ according to Marine Corps documents. The D.I. was court-martialed in 2014, having been turned in by his senior D.I., who himself would later be court-martialed for ordering his platoon into the showers and making them run in place, while thickening the air by pouring bleach down the drain. After these stories broke, some Marines recalled the routine nature of such punishments and how infrequently they were ever brought to light. ‘‘Reporting it would have gotten nowhere,’’ a onetime Parris Island recruit, who claimed that he was made to scrub the floors with pure bleach, wrote in a Reddit thread in 2014. ‘‘I saw too much other stuff get swept under the rug.’’
In June 2014, Lt. Col. Kate Germano arrived at Parris Island to head up the Fourth Battalion, which trains the corps’s female recruits. She found a culture badly in need of reform. Two of her female drill instructors were facing courts-martial for mistreating recruits and, in one case, abusing other, lower-ranking drill instructors, a phenomenon known as ‘‘hat hazing.’’ Abuses toward the recruits included ethnic slurs, so-called hard corrections like pushing and shoving and refusing to give recruits bathroom breaks. Germano, who spent 2004 and 2005 as an adjutant and Marine Corps legal officer in Iraq, was so alarmed that she decided to give her subordinates a PowerPoint presentation on Abu Ghraib. ‘‘I saw a direct similarity between the culture in both places,’’ she says.
Germano believed that much of the failure rested with the depot’s regimental commander, Col. Daniel Haas, who had been at Parris Island since July 2013. (The Marines declined to make Colonel Haas available for a response.) Haas had a remote leadership style — ‘‘not the type of guy that will care and feed you,’’ one of his other battalion commanders later said — that clashed with Germano’s more hands-on approach, which included impromptu walk-throughs and counseling her subordinates to demand more of the female recruits to help them compete effectively with their male counterparts. While many of her Marines made changes, others perceived Ger­mano as meddlesome.
In April 2015, less than a year after coming to Parris Island and 11 months before Raheel’s arrival, Germano received the results of the battalion’s annual Command Climate Survey, in which lower-ranking officers and noncommanding officers evaluate their commanders. In her survey, Germano’s subordinates described her as ‘‘hostile, unprofessional and abusive.’’ Though Germano maintains she was none of those things, the commanding general of Parris Island relieved her of her command following an investigation.
Across Parris Island, commanders of the different training battalions were contending with hazing allegations ranging from abusive language to assault. In an internal memo from the spring of 2015, the commander of Parris Island’s First Recruit Training Battalion noted that ‘‘staying on top of D.I. hazing/misconduct’’ was his biggest challenge. ‘‘It’s never-ending,’’ he wrote. This was even more pronounced in the Third Recruit Training Battalion, which, as one commander wrote, attracted ‘‘Type-A’’ personalities who may not ‘‘rebound from past mistakes.’’
Isolated in a remote corner of the depot, the Third had long been a rogue fief on Parris Island, its silent pact with Marine officialdom being that it would create the most disciplined recruits but would do so in its own way. It had operated in this manner for more than 60 years, and even in the era of values-based training, the Third was virtually unchanged.
In 1998, a Navy chaplain, Thomas Creely, now retired, came to Parris Island to serve as chaplain for the recruit training regiment and noticed a particularly stark pattern of abuse in the Third. ‘‘For example,’’ he later wrote in a paper presented to the International Society for Military Ethics, ‘‘after lunch recruits were made to drink water until they vomited. Then they were made to do push-ups in their own vomit.’’ Creely worked with the command until 2003 to try to eradicate the problem, but the ‘‘blind loyalty of drill instructors,’’ who remained silent in the face of abuse, stood in the way. ‘‘What you have in the Third Battalion is a cycle of abuse,’’ Creely told me recently. ‘‘And until that cycle is broken, it doesn’t matter how much education you do.’’
Lt. Col. Joshua Kissoon, who commanded the Third Battalion while Germano was on the base, was a by-the-book Marine who publicly took a hard stance against hazing. Shortly after assuming command, he instituted a zero-tolerance policy on the touching of recruits by their D.I.s and put his staff on warning: Any violation of the rules would be investigated. Between 2013 and 2015, 221 preliminary hazing investigations were conducted across the depot’s four battalions; 69 of those were from the Third, and more were punished from that battalion than any other. This included three D.I.s who were recommended for courts-martial after an investigation first reported by Wade Livingston at The Beaufort Gazette in February 2015 revealed a ‘‘staggering level of misconduct and recruit abuse,’’ with recruits reporting that they were choked, kicked and punched in the face, and that they had their heads slammed against walls.
Some junior officers felt the D.I.s were being punished unfairly, though they themselves were never in the squad bays. (One later said his presence in the barracks ‘‘undermines’’ the drill instructors.) When Colonel Kissoon received the results of his own Command Climate Survey in April 2015, they were not much better than Germano’s. That spring, Kissoon began to take a softer line in some cases, according to Marines in the battalion. On his desktop, his subordinates later said, he kept a redacted copy of the command investigation that led to Germano’s firing. ‘‘This could happen to me,’’ he told colleagues.
It was into this environment of ‘‘inconsistent decision making,’’ as some of Kissoon’s officers put it, that a new group of Third Batallion recruits landed in April 2015. Most were straight out of high school. A few had been college students. Two had master’s degrees. Another had been living in his car. All now learned their survival depended on how they handled the cognitive dissonance between what they learned as official Marine Corps policy and how that policy was systematically ignored.
Jake Weaver, then 19, a new member of Platoon 3054, Lima Company, recalls that when he met his D.I.s, they gave him and his fellow recruits a choice. ‘‘You want to be trained like Marines, right? Not like crappy ‘individual’ Marines?’’
‘‘Individualism’’ was a sign of what the D.I.s called ‘‘the new corps,’’ a place where ‘‘everyone can walk through and become a Marine,’’ Weaver recalls, and drill instructors couldn’t get away with what they used to. ‘‘They’d convince us to feel like it was wrong to be trained by the book,’’ he says, ‘‘and if we wanted to be trained right, the old-school way, we had to let them beat us and haze us and not say anything, because that’s how you become a Marine.’’
Weaver, who grew up in rural Interlachen, Fla., was the grandson of a Marine who fought in the Korean War. His senior drill instructor was a squarely built Marine who told his recruits he’d served in Iraq. He also claimed he was involved in a friendly-fire incident in which 10 Marine infantrymen were killed, though most officials I spoke with say the story is doubtful. (‘‘There wasn’t an incident in that whole war where you had 10 or 12 people killed in one swoop,’’ Krulak told me.) As Weaver saw it, his D.I. behaved like a person with PTSD. ‘‘He lost his temper like crazy. Some days he’d be supermotivating toward us,’’ he says, ‘‘and then an hour later we’d be almost done for the day, and he’d walk in the squad bay and just flip out.’’
During the day, platoons were put through the standard exhaustive physical and tactical training, interspersed with classes or informal discussions on moral courage in battle. But the real making of Marines went on at night. When darkness fell, a D.I. would sometimes dump a bottle of Gain detergent on the floor and order recruits, both hands on their wooden scrub or ‘‘scuzz’’ brushes, to run across the length of the squad bay in a bear-crawl position, an exercise that they timed and called the Indy 500. Other nights, the drill instructors would create what they called a ‘‘hurricane’’ by dumping everyone’s things on the floor, sometimes covered with detergent, sunscreen or shaving cream. Over the months, recruits in the battalion lost consciousness, were revived and never told a soul. A few developed life-threatening rhabdomyolysis, a rapid breakdown of skeletal muscle tissue, often caused by overexertion.
Gunnery Sgt. Joseph Felix was one of Lima Company’s most aggressive D.I.s. Recruits knew to be scared of Felix, even those like Weaver who weren’t in his platoon. ‘‘He was pretty frickin’ psycho,’’ one Marine recalls. Felix, a swaggering man with a shaved head, enlisted in 2002 and served in Iraq and Afghanistan, working as a crew chief maintaining aircraft and their weapons systems. He talked about his resentment toward Muslims, whom he blamed for killing some of his friends in the war. (Felix’s lawyer did not respond to requests for comment.) Ameer Bourmeche, a Muslim recruit from Brooklyn and Weaver’s platoonmate, soon became Felix’s target. ‘‘I remember him calling Bourmeche a ‘terrorist,’ ’’ recalls the recruit in Platoon 3054, who asked not to be identified. ‘‘He used to mess with him: ‘Where are the W.M.D.s?’ ‘Were you part of 9/11?’ ’’
Though Bourmeche, who declined to comment for this article, never talked about his faith to anyone’s recollection, the platoon was made aware of it during their first week of training, when one of their drill instructors polled the group on their religions. Weaver thought it was strange: ‘‘He was giving us this talk about how we’re all brothers in the Marine Corps, and how we’re all in this together, no matter what race or religion we are. Then he was asking us: ‘What religions do we have here? I’m sure we have Christians. I’m sure we have an atheist. I’m sure you’re a Baptist.’ ’’ He looked at Bourmeche. ‘‘What’s your religion?’’
‘‘Islam, sir,’’ Bourmeche replied.
The sergeant seemed intrigued. ‘‘There’s nothing wrong with recruit Bourmeche being a Muslim,’’ he said.
Less than one-fifth of 1 percent of the Marine Corps is Muslim. Across the entire United States military, there are fewer than 6,000 self-reported Muslim active-duty and reserve troops, or about 0.27 percent out of a total force of 2.2 million. Many of the recruits had never met a Muslim in their lives. ‘‘I was pretty narrow-minded when I came in,’’ one of Bourmeche’s platoonmates admits. ‘‘I was like: ‘Why is he here?’ ’’
Bourmeche seemed to be singled out nearly every day for punishment. ‘‘He was one of the smartest kids in the platoon, scored really high on all his tests, but they just messed with him,’’ Weaver says. He remembers Bourmeche twice being sent to the medical unit after punitive intensive training sessions intended, his friends figured, to force him to drop out. He refused. In early July, Platoon 3054 took part in their final, 54-hour test, the Crucible, grinding through 90-degree heat. Each recruit finished the course and earned the precious eagle, globe and anchor pins and the title ‘‘Marine.’’
On July 14, 2015, Felix and several other D.I.s entered the squad bay in the middle of the night. It appeared they’d been drinking in the small office, or ‘‘D.I. hut,’’ at the far end of the barracks, where drill instructors on night duty sometimes slept. Felix was so drunk ‘‘he might not have known what he did the next day,’’ according to one member of Platoon 3054.
‘‘Where’s the terrorist?’’ Felix said. He ap​proached Bourmeche’s rack. ‘‘You a terrorist?’’
‘‘No, sir!’’
‘‘You a Muslim?’’
‘‘Yes, sir!’’
‘‘Attention!’’
Bourmeche jumped down.
‘‘Column left!’’ Felix and another D.I. marched him into the shower room, where, as Bourmeche would later tell investigators, the drill instructors turned on the water and made him do push-ups, high-knees and crunches. Then, when he was thoroughly wet, they marched him into the laundry room.
‘‘Get in the dryer.’’ Bourmeche folded his six-foot, 157-pound frame into the Speed Queen. Felix said that the Marine Corps has ‘‘a way of weeding out spies.’’ He continued: ‘‘I’m going to find out who you really are.’’ Then he closed the door.
‘‘Who are you working for?’’ Felix called.
‘‘Nobody, sir!’’ Bourmeche answered.
Felix ran the dryer for half a minute and opened it.
‘‘What’s your religion?’’
‘‘Islam, sir!’’
In the squad bay, Weaver and the others, ordered out of their beds, were pushing a recruit around like a scuzz brush. They heard Bourmeche’s body thud as it hit the bottom of the dryer. ‘‘You’re going to kill us the first chance you get, aren’t you, terrorist? What are your plans?’’
Inside the dryer, Bourmeche began to cry. His neck and shoulder were burned.
Felix opened the door. ‘‘Are you still a Muslim?’’
‘‘Yes, sir!’’
A half an hour later, it was over. Bourmeche, damp and shaken, was told to go back to the squad bay. As he was standing by his bed, a D.I. approached him. ‘‘It’s pretty effed-up what they did to you back there,’’ he said. Bourmeche agreed. ‘‘You’re not going to tell a senior drill instructor about this, though, right?’’
‘‘No, sir,’’ Bourmeche answered.
The next night, it happened again. Felix told Bourmeche to hand him his martial-arts belt. He tied Bourmeche’s shoelaces together, then took the belt, wrapped it around Bourmeche’s neck, strung it under his laces and tightened it so Bourmeche bent at the waist. ‘‘Are you a terrorist?’’ Felix held the end of the belt like a leash. He began to walk him like a dog. ‘‘Are you a spy?’’
Bourmeche, in pain, began screaming. ‘‘No, sir!’’
‘‘Yell ‘Allah akbar.’ ’’
‘‘Allah akbar!’’
While the rest of the platoon looked on, Felix crushed the platoon’s flagpole into Bourmeche’s toes. Then he handed him a scuzz brush. ‘‘Cut off his head,’’ he said, pointing to another new Marine. ‘‘Show us you’re a terrorist.’’
Bourmeche struck his platoonmate in the neck with the brush several times. Felix seemed pleased. ‘‘This is how the Taliban would do it,’’ he told the platoon. ‘‘And he’d cut your head off just as quick as his brethren.’’
Another D.I. shook his head. ‘‘We let a full-blood terrorist join the corps,’’ he said. Afterward, no one said a word. What happens on Parris Island stays on Parris Island — that had been the message all through boot camp.
Weaver, one of the platoon’s highest-performing recruits, was shaken. During a family picnic just before his graduation, he told his parents that ‘‘crazy stuff’’ happened during training. ‘‘I can’t talk about it here,’’ he said nervously. ‘‘After we get off the island, we can talk about it.’’
Over the next few months, Weaver tried to push what he experienced to the back of his mind, but it was always there. He had believed the Marines was an ethical organization. Then a D.I. bashed his head against a wall for seemingly no reason. And another, after asking if he was a devout Christian, taunted him: ‘‘Say ‘goddamn.’ ’’ That fall, Weaver, then in his last phase of training in Pensacola, Fla., suffered a breakdown and was hospitalized with suicidal thoughts.
Having lost his desire to serve, he received word he was being given an ‘‘other-than-honorable discharge’’ from the Marines. His father, Troy, decided to phone his commanding officer and tell her what he knew. ‘‘The fact is, the abuse would have never been reported had I not stood up and said, ‘Look, you’re not going to give him a bad discharge because of what he went through at Parris Island,’ ’’ Troy told me. ‘‘Those kids weren’t talking.’’ (Weaver was given an other-than-honorable discharge, which he continues to contest.)
On Nov. 5, 2015, Marine officials on Parris Island began an investigation into allegations of abuse based on statements Weaver, Bourmeche and another former recruit from Platoon 3054 had given their commanding officer. Weaver claims the investigators spent only 10 minutes talking to him. Kissoon, through his lawyer, maintains that during this period, Col. Paul Cucinotta, who had replaced Haas as regimental commander in the summer of 2015, refused to brief him on the inquiry as it was unfolding. Internal Marine reports later described the investigation as ‘‘suboptimal.’’
When the investigators submitted their findings to Cucinotta in January 2016, the training regiment’s executive officer, Lt. Col. Christopher Lynch, found the evidence persuasive enough to recommend that those involved be ‘‘sat down’’ or suspended from their duties. Cucinotta later claimed he agreed. (‘‘We disagree with Colonel Cucinotta’s testimony,’’ says Kissoon’s attorney, Colby Volkey.) As of February, however, none of those implicated in the investigation had been suspended. Four months after the hazing reports, Gunnery Sgt. Joseph Felix returned to the Third Battalion and assumed the title of senior drill instructor, this time for Platoon 3042, Kilo Company.
Raheel Siddiqui debarked from the bus on the night of March 7, 2016. It was late, and he was tired, unsure of what came next. He moved onto the yellow footprints, through the silver hatches and into the chaos and sleep deprivation that would define his first 96 hours on Parris Island. Four days later, a day traditionally known as Black Friday (even though in this case it was a Saturday), Raheel was assigned to Platoon 3042, arriving with the 60 or so other newly shorn and outfitted recruits at Kilo Company’s three-story red brick barracks. His squad bay, a cavernous room with beige-green walls and floors shiny from excessive scrubbing, was on the top floor.
As the recruits sat crossed-legged, Sergeant Felix stepped forward. ‘‘I am your senior drill instructor,’’ he said with the signature barking cadence D.I.s use to exert their authority, and then began his scripted pledge. He promised to treat them with ‘‘firmness, fairness, dignity and compassion,’’ and informed them that abuse would not be tolerated.
There wasn’t anything particularly unusual about that first day. The new recruits were ordered to perform hundreds of burpees. They were told to dangle their rifles off the ends of their pinkies. They were ‘‘dog-piled’’ into a corner and then ordered to run back and forth, over and over. One of Raheel’s platoonmates, who shared with me his detailed recollections on the condition of anonymity, thought he was going to pass out. ‘‘And I was in pretty good shape,’’ he says. ‘‘I remember one kid had a panic attack and started throwing up, and I think he peed himself, too.’’ The officers stood in the back of the squad bay, he says. When they left, ‘‘that’s when the real hell started.’’
On the morning of March 13, less than 24 hours after being picked up by his platoon, Raheel announced to his D.I.s that he’d rather die than continue training. He would jump out the squad-bay window if he had to.
When a recruit threatens suicide, everything stops. At first the D.I.s tried to reason with Raheel: What would his mother think were he to come home without becoming a Marine? ‘‘I’d tell my mother goodbye and kill myself,’’ he said. ‘‘The future does not matter.’’ The Marines took Raheel’s belt and boot laces to prevent him from strangling himself.
Suicide threats are common during the early weeks of boot camp, though how many are serious is unclear. ‘‘Everyone knows saying you’re suicidal is a ticket off Parris Island,’’ Raheel’s platoonmate says. Sickness or broken bones, on the other hand, will get a recruit a long stint in medical, after which they will simply be assigned to another company and start training all over again.
Base officials determined Raheel didn’t qualify for emergency transport to the hospital. Instead, he was ‘‘cross-decked’’: They moved him, still without laces or a belt, to another platoon’s squad bay. Over the next 24 hours, he sat there cross-legged on a mattress in the middle of the room while a ‘‘shadow watch’’ of recruits shined a flashlight on his face and took turns monitoring him around the clock. At some point during this period, Raheel, who had to request permission to leave the mattress to use the bathroom, recanted his suicide threat and said he’d decided he wanted to be a Marine.
The next morning, Felix escorted Raheel to recruit liaison services, an office set up to ascertain if recruits had enlisted fraudulently (such as by failing to disclose a history of suicidal ideation), and to motivate struggling recruits to return to training. Drill instructors who accompany recruits to these sessions usually sit in a waiting area, but Felix ‘‘stood about 10 feet away,’’ according to the report, while Raheel provided what was referred to as a ‘‘voluntary statement’’ retracting his threat. ‘‘This recruit thought it was the only way to quit,’’ he said. ‘‘This recruit never meant that and regrets it.’’ The base’s mental-health unit deemed him to be at a ‘‘low risk for harm,’’ and Raheel went back to training.
It would be noted later, in the Marines’ report, that Raheel, shortly after saying he wanted to kill himself, confided to the military police who were going to escort him to the hospital that he ‘‘could not handle’’ being hit by his drill instructors. The allegation was noted and disregarded several times by what appeared to be several officials.
In reviewing the incidents of that week, the Marines made no mention of the four days after Raheel resumed training. His platoonmate, though, recalls them as torture. As one report noted, Platoon 3042’s senior drill instructor ‘‘taught his subordinate drill instructors that in order to be successful at training recruits, they needed to ‘hate recruits.’ ’’ They were called ‘‘bitches,’’ ‘‘faggots,’’ ‘‘maggots,’’ ‘‘little bitches,’’ ‘‘pussies’’ and ‘‘retards.’’ A Russian-born recruit was called ‘‘the Russian,’’ or ‘‘the cosmonaut,’’ and was asked if he was a Russian spy. Raheel was called a terrorist. Felix asked on one occasion if he needed his turban.
Raheel’s platoonmate didn’t understand why Raheel had joined the Marines. Orders seemed to confound him. Rather than simply following them, he thought about what he was asked. ‘‘Like a normal person,’’ the platoonmate says. ‘‘It’s not necessarily wrong, but it’s not how they wanted it. It wasn’t the Marine way of doing things.’’ This earned Raheel, who always ‘‘looked like a scared animal,’’ as his platoonmate says, undue attention from the D.I.s. ‘‘Anything that’s not masculine — if you’re not six feet tall and built like a football player — that’s not what they want. They want people who are the definition of Marines. Anyone else, you have to prove yourself.’’
Once, the platoonmate recalls, Felix stuffed a recruit in a footlocker. Another time, he made a recruit eat nothing but Jell-O and mashed potatoes for a few days, and threatened that if he didn’t improve, he’d have to stuff him in a locker, too. Choking recruits until they were gasping for air was common. Some of the D.I.s, the platoonmate suspected, were almost as terrified of their senior D.I. as the recruits were. One drill instructor, he recalled, became so ill that he projectile-vomited all over the squad bay while simultaneously yelling at the recruits after he himself had been screamed at by Felix moments before. ‘‘We never knew if it was blood or Gatorade, but he’s vomiting this red stuff while screaming, and we were like, What is going on?’’
On March 17, Platoon 3042 received instruction on Marine Corps mixed-martial-arts punching techniques. According to the Marines’ report, recruits in Lima Company were instructed to throw a ‘‘flurry of punches’’ as hard as they could, and not to listen to their instructors’ directions but instead ‘‘just to keep punching.’’ It was routine, recruits later said, for their drill instructors to pair bigger or stronger recruits against the weaker or poorly performing recruits. During the March 17 drill, recruits were punched repeatedly in unprotected parts of their body, including their jaws. One sustained two broken ribs. The abuse, according to the report, caused one recruit ‘‘to cry during the event.’’ The platoonmate believed one of the targeted recruits was Raheel, but he can’t be sure. ‘‘It’s really all a blur,’’ he says. It was only Day 4. Many recruits didn’t even know one another’s names. Terror caused them to avoid making eye contact. ‘‘Lots of stuff happened while we slept,’’ he says. ‘‘Or in the dark.’’
At around 2 a.m. on March 18, Raheel woke up his bunkmate. He was in pain, he said. We’re all in pain, the other recruit told him. Two hours later, the recruits awoke and prepared to sound off before leaving for chow. Raheel pointed to his throat and silently mouthed words. When two D.I.s started yelling at him, Raheel handed one of them a note. ‘‘This recruit has to go to medical. This recruit’s throat has been swollen for three days and is getting worse,’’ it said. ‘‘This recruit also coughed blood a few times last night. And this recruit completely lost his voice and can barely whisper. This recruit’s whole neck is in a lot of pain.’’
A D.I. told Raheel they would deal with the matter after breakfast. He sat silently through the meal, zombielike. Upon returning to the barracks, the platoon set about cleaning, and Raheel was called to the front of the squad bay. He was supposed to fill out a form so he could go to the medical unit. He stood before Felix but failed to greet him properly, perhaps because he couldn’t speak. His silence seemed to enrage the senior drill instructor. ‘‘Get back!’’ he shouted. Raheel ran 144 feet across the squad bay from one end to the other. ‘‘Siddiqui, run!’’ Felix continued. ‘‘Get back! Run!’’
His platoonmate, who had been quietly making his bed and trying to stay out of the D.I.s’ line of sight, watched Raheel running back and forth. Suddenly Raheel grabbed his throat, crying, and fell to the floor. Some recruits thought he was faking. ‘‘I don’t know if he did it willingly, I don’t know if he was just exhausted, but he dropped,’’ the platoonmate says.
‘‘Get up, Siddiqui!’’ Felix shouted. ‘‘I know you’re faking. Get up!’’
At this point, reports differ. Raheel appeared to be unconscious. A D.I. claimed he rubbed his knuckles across Raheel’s sternum to revive him. Other recruits and drill instructors say that never happened. The platoonmate I interviewed recalls seeing Raheel, on the floor, clutching his throat. Leaning over, Felix slapped him across the face. Five feet away, Raheel’s platoonmate thought at first the D.I. was ‘‘acting like an emergency responder,’’ trying to revive him. But then he slapped him again, so hard that the sound echoed across the squad bay.
‘‘And Siddiqui gets up, and he starts dead sprinting, which I thought was a logical thing to do: This is boot camp, he’s running away,’’ his platoonmate says. But he was running too fast. ‘‘He is literally sprinting the fastest I’d ever seen anyone sprint,’’ he says. Slowly it dawned on him what Raheel was about to do. ‘‘We were all still cleaning, kind of dispersed around the squad bay.’’ The doors, he recalls, were open. ‘‘And he straight-up jumped.’’
He was alive when he landed, his body bouncing off the steel handrails and onto the concrete steps. A Marine passing by phoned 9-1-1. The other D.I.s herded the platoon into the bathroom and instructed the recruits to face the wall. They heard the ambulance show up and depart. Then they were herded to physical training as if it were any other morning and told not to talk about what they’d seen. ‘‘They tried to put the blame on him,’’ the platoonmate says — like, ‘‘ ‘We were trying to train him, and he took it wrong.’ But I mean, what the hell are we doing here? I just watched a kid kill himself. I’m not here for that. We were all traumatized.’’
An air ambulance was requested to take Raheel to a hospital in Savannah, Ga., 40 miles away, but the request was denied because of heavy fog. A second air lift was scuttled, and so Marines drove him to Beaufort Memorial Hospital, where after an hour of sustained effort in the emergency room, doctors decided Raheel needed higher-level care. Three hours after his fall, he arrived at the Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston. It was too late: At 10:06, after more than an hour of attempts to save his life, Raheel was pronounced dead.
The following day, an autopsy was performed at the hospital. The medical examiner concluded that Raheel died of blunt-force trauma sustained during his fall. But the autopsy report, details of which were shown to me by the Siddiqui family, also found evidence of petechial hemorrhaging, which can be caused by anything from heavy coughing to vomiting or asphyxiation and strangulation. Several days later, J. Edward Allen, the Beaufort County coroner, wrote a final autopsy report concluding that ‘‘in light of the history provided and the autopsy findings,’’ Raheel had committed suicide.
A week after Raheel died, his body was sent back to his parents in Michigan. At the funeral home, the family stared down in horror at their son. His arms, chest, stomach and legs were purple. There were ligature marks, not unlike the ridges of a webbed military belt, around his neck, which had not been mentioned in the autopsy report. To Ghazala it looked as if her son had been tortured.
In Beaufort, a city with three military installations that collectively pump over $1.5 billion into the local economy, the news that a Marine recruit had died on Parris Island was met with studied silence. ‘‘Marine Corps boot camp isn’t the Boy Scouts,’’ one reader posted on the Facebook page of The Beaufort Gazette, which broke the story on March 20. ‘‘Stay home if you can’t handle some hazing.’’ Hazing had not been mentioned publicly at this point, but in Detroit, the Siddiquis’ Democratic congresswoman, Representative Debbie Dingell, heard through an anonymous tip that religious bias might have played a role in Raheel’s death. In April, Dingell wrote to the Marine commandant, Gen. Robert Neller, asking that an ‘‘unbiased inquiry’’ be made into the matter. Dingell recently told me that soon after she wrote the letter, she received anonymous calls telling her to stay out of Marine business. ‘‘Some of my own colleagues warned me, ‘You don’t want to challenge the Marines on their training methods,’ ’’ she said.
The official investigation into the death of Raheel Siddiqui lasted over a year and spawned two other investigations: a more thorough examination of the hazing allegations in the Bourmeche case and a broader hazing inquiry requested in spring 2016 by the Obama White House, after the president received an anonymous email from unnamed ‘‘concerned loved ones of innocent recruits’’ claiming their children were being abused.
On Sept. 8, 2016, the Marine Corps released the findings of these investigations. That same day, the corps announced that 20 Marines — including, it was later revealed, three teams of drill instructors, several junior officers, Kissoon and the depot’s new regimental commander, Col. Paul Cucinotta — had been relieved of duty and faced punishment pending the results of further investigation. (In early June, Kissoon appeared before the military’s version of a grand jury, and he is still awaiting charges. Six Marines, representing much of the chain of command, were granted immunity or other considerations to testify against him, according to Kissoon’s lawyer.) The reports were heavily redacted; in the 132-page command inquiry into Raheel’s death, the last 43 pages were entirely blacked out.
Of those involved in the three investigations, just six Marines have been formally charged with wrongdoing. Four Marines — one of whom was acquitted at trial, another who pleaded guilty, a third who made ‘‘a pretrial agreement with prosecutors,’’ according to a Marine spokesman, and a fourth who faces a general court-martial — had charges levied against them for abuse-related incidents elsewhere in Lima Company. Felix and another drill instructor, Staff Sgt. Michael Eldridge, were charged with a range of offenses including cruelty and maltreatment, drunk and disorderly conduct and failure to obey a general order. In Felix’s case, the charges also included obstruction of justice stemming from the dryer incident involving Bourmeche and the hazing of Raheel. Both face general courts-martial later this summer.
A number of former and current Marine officials, including several high-ranking officers, say they are agonized by the reports. ‘‘What I’m hearing makes my stomach turn,’’ the senior officer I spoke to says. ‘‘This isn’t rocket science. We have procedures and policies and rules on the books against this stuff, and people have to enforce them. I mean, who is in charge? If you are having a hard time controlling those drill instructors, you’re not a leader.’’
Though it would be tempting to blame the allegations of abuse on a few Marines — the ‘‘few bad apples’’ theory — Raheel’s platoonmate told me that rough practices in his platoon continued long after Felix and his drill instructor team were replaced, the very next day, with another team, and after that team was later replaced with another. The message, he says, was ‘‘the D.I.s could pretty much get away with anything. Let’s say you did report something. They’d change the D.I., and what happens after that? Another D.I. who presumably was friends with the prior D.I. is going to make your life hell.’’
On Aug. 7, nearly a year and a half to the day that Raheel Siddiqui arrived on Parris Island, Gunnery Sgt. Joseph Felix will stand trial, a proceeding expected to last at least two weeks. The charges against him are technically violations of military discipline; he has not faced broader criminal charges like assault. The Siddiqui family thinks the charges are insufficient. ‘‘We were advised that an assault charge was not brought because the [other charges] carried a harsher penalty,’’ says Shiraz Khan, the family’s lawyer. ‘‘Well, the elements of assault are much different, and so are the implications. The systemic hazing, abuse and maltreatment suffered by Raheel Siddiqui while at Parris Island was not the result of a single incident by one individual. We aren’t blind to what Raheel’s body and autopsy say.’’
When I visited the Siddiquis’ small apartment late last fall, Ghazala, wearing jeans and a sparkly blue hijab, showed me photographs she took of her son’s body at the funeral home. ‘‘Why would they do this to my son?’’ she said, distraught, pausing over a photograph of Raheel’s neck. Taking me upstairs, she led me into his room, which was spotless, almost antiseptic, a shrine to a sometimes mischievous yet fundamentally obedient boy who prayed at least four times a day, dressed in colorful shirts and smiled so much and so often that those who knew him could never imagine him being depressed. Ghazala showed off Raheel’s academic awards and his orange Home Depot apron inscribed with good-luck messages written by every one of his colleagues. The dress-blue uniform he would have worn upon graduating boot camp hung in his closet, neatly pressed. The Marines had dressed Raheel’s body in it. ‘‘He was brainwashed,’’ Ghazala said, wiping away a tear. ‘‘He’s smart, intelligent, beautiful, excellent boy. Perfect. I am so proud of my son.’’ Ghazala spoke of him in the present tense.
No one from the family has agreed to be interviewed since last winter. ‘‘Their son is gone, there are no answers and they’re suffering,’’ says Khan, who told me that his office has received only 20 or so of about 220 pages they’ve requested from the investigation, and have had very little direct discussion with the Marines. For the most part, he says, they have learned about any progress in the case by reading the newspapers.
Kate Germano, who retired from the Marines in 2016, isn’t surprised. ‘‘The last thing the Marines would want is anyone connecting the dots,’’ she told me recently. ‘‘This is a cultural issue. The conduct that is considered acceptable at Parris Island, from the failures in leadership to the hands-on methods the drill instructors use, would not be acceptable anywhere else in the Marine Corps. But down there, for whatever reason, it’s considered a badge of honor. Those who don’t see it that way are considered weak. But it’s not the kids’ fault.’’
The island’s new commanding general, Austin Renforth, known as Sparky, who took control several months after Raheel’s death, insists they are rooting out the problem. Under his watch, officers play a more active role in supervising drill instructors, something many officials believe is essential to reforming the culture. Renforth, though, insists the problems on Parris Island aren’t cultural. ‘‘This place is such a fishbowl — when someone does something wrong it gets national attention, but it’s not systemic,’’ he says. That said, he allowed, ‘‘I have to make sure it never happens again.’’ Renforth doesn’t explain how he plans to do this, other than to say he wants everyone involved in making Marines to have ‘‘buy-in,’’ as he puts it.
Renforth is the epitome of a combat Marine: graduate of the U.S. Naval Academy, commander during the first gulf war and the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, son of a World War II veteran who himself went through boot camp on Parris Island in 1941. This is his first training command, and he says he was surprised that many of his D.I.s were not combat vets. A year ago, in the very beginning of his tenure, Renforth, who has five children, considered reaching out to Ghazala and Massood. He changed his mind. ‘‘I just didn’t feel it was my place,’’ he says.
Tragedies happen. But a vast majority of recruits, he says, make it through boot camp just fine. ‘‘We want them all to transform,’’ Renforth says. ‘‘If they show up with a little ‘want to’ in their hearts, they’ll make it.’’ Renforth has no plans to change the fundamentals of training. ‘‘I believe in the way we make Marines, and I believe in the product,’’ he says. In the end, it’s about instilling ‘‘core values.’’ ‘‘We get kids from all over the nation, and we try to fill them up with values,’’ he says. ‘‘It changes their lives.’’
