On June 7, Alan Noble, an English professor at Oklahoma Baptist University, laid out the Christian case against Donald Trump for Vox. Noble, whose goal is “to edify the Church and witness to the world,” declared that
Noble’s argument has fallen on deaf ears. As of mid-August, a Pew survey found Trump beating Hillary Clinton 63-17 among white religious conservatives.
Evangelical Christians may not approve of Trump, but they are among his strongest constituencies in this year’s campaign. The Christian right has found common ground with Trump’s less devout supporters on a wide range of matters.
Gary Bauer, the president of American Values, who has endorsed Trump, captured a key aspect of Trump’s appeal to leaders of the Christian right in his address to the Values Voters Summit last weekend in Washington:
Bauer continued to invoke a metaphor that in short order has become a talking point on the right:
The findings of two surveys conducted this year by the Public Religion Research Institute provide insight into the underlying logic of white evangelical support for Trump.
In April, P.R.R.I. asked voters: do you agree or disagree with the statement “Society as a whole has become too soft and feminine.” The results demonstrated the overlap between the views of the religious right and the Trump electorate:
Along parallel lines, the survey found that 68 percent of Trump supporters agree that society is too soft and feminine, far more than supporters of any other candidate, Republican or Democrat.
A second illuminating question P.R.R.I. posed to voters was whether this statement accurately described their feelings: “It bothers me when I come in contact with immigrants who speak little or no English.”
Again Trump voters and the religious right agree. Compared to backers of all the other candidates, Trump voters expressed the highest level of discomfort, 77 percent. Among religious groups, white evangelical Protestants voiced the highest levels of distress, 64 percent, when they find themselves around immigrants who speak little or no English,.
There are a host of other measures on which Trump supporters and the religious right are in accord.
Take responses to a third P.R.R.I. statement: “Today discrimination against whites has become as big a problem as discrimination against blacks and other minorities.”
A solid 57 percent majority of white Americans whom P.R.R.I. surveyed agreed, but two groups stood out: Trump supporters at 81 percent and white evangelical Protestants at 68 percent.
The opinion overlap does not end there, P.R.R.I. found:
Robert Jones, the C.E.O. of P.R.R.I. and the author of the new book, “The End of White Christian America,” described this overlap in an email:
Similarly, according to P.R.R.I.,
A separate Pew Research Center poll in August expanded upon these findings: white Christian evangelicals consistently demonstrated the highest levels of support for Trump’s views, including for the argument that undocumented immigrants take jobs Americans “would like to have;” for the belief that undocumented immigrants are “more likely to commit serious crimes” than Americans; and for building a wall along the entire border with Mexico.
Melissa Deckman, a political scientist at Washington College in Chestertown, Md., argued in an email that a national shift to the left on many social and cultural issues is driving the white evangelical community into the Trump camp.
Trump has endorsed so-called religious liberty legislation that agressively affirms a minister’s right to refuse to marry a same-sex couple, for example, or a devout baker’s right to refuse to provide a cake for a same-sex marriage. At the federal level, the legislation would make it legal for churches to engage in direct political action without facing a threat to their tax exemptions.
Many conservative Christians consider enactment of religious liberty legislation crucial to the survival of their movement.
Here is Deckman on the idea of “religious liberty”:
What this and the poll data tells us is that the Trump campaign has become, however improbably, a comfortable home for the religious right.
Yet another area of commonality between Christian conservatives and the Trump campaign is their shared belief in the duty of the strong to lead the weak — the importance of leadership built on strength, authority and discipline.
Take a story first told in 1978 by James Dobson, the founder of Focus on the Family, in his book “The Strong-Willed Child.” It provides crucial understanding of this worldview.
Dobson’s thinking on the topic of strength and authority is dominated by a single theme:
As a case study for handling defiant children, Dobson describes his own method for dealing with a six-year-old pet Dachshund, Siggie, who refused Dobson’s order to go to sleep in “a permanent enclosure.”
Permissive adults who fail to learn the importance of establishing who’s boss, according to Dobson, will suffer the consequences:
Dobson’s story about Siggie gives us a glimpse of how the views on authority of some on the right match up with Trump’s views on what it takes to be an effective leader.
Failed leaders — Trump’s Republican opponents in the primaries, Republicans who continue to reject his bid and, most of all, Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama — are endlessly “weak:”
On Kelly Ayotte, New Hampshire Republican Senator:
On Clinton:
On Obama:
Weak leaders, in Trump’s view, encourage adversaries to defy American authority. In this context, weakness and permissiveness are interchangeable.
“President Obama has weakened our military by weakening our economy,” Trump declared in an April foreign policy address. The result of this weakness, according to Trump, is that:
Russell Moore, the president of the Southern Baptist Convention’s Ethics and Religious Liberty Commission and one of the few leaders on the Christian Right to oppose Trump, wrote on Feb. 29 in the Washington Post:
This year, Moore noted, Christian leaders who in the 1990s
In backing Trump, Moore concluded, “a group of high-profile old-guard evangelicals has proven these critics right.”
Moore’s voice has, been drowned out on the Christian Right by pastors like the Rev. Robert Jeffress in Dallas, who has said that if offered a candidate modeled on Jesus:
In practice, Jeffress said:
In other words, key leaders of the Christian right want a president who will treat recalcitrant nations and people in the way that Dobson dealt with Siggie — “the meanest, toughest, son of a you-know-what I can find.” It’s little wonder that these same leaders are willing to overlook the bottomless list of Trump’s personal and business failings.
Clyde Wilcox, a political scientist at Georgetown who has written sympathetically about the religious right, emailed me his take:
But it is Randall Balmer, a professor of religion at Dartmouth, who wrote perhaps the most cogent analysis of Trump’s evangelical support in an op-ed in the Washington Post in May:
