At noon on Friday, Donald Trump will become the 45th president of the United States. Millions of Americans will rejoice at the sight, and millions more will not. As a rule, foreign leaders don’t attend the inauguration of American presidents, but Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, will be there in spirit. To understand why and to understand what’s happening as Trump takes over the White House, we need to go back two weeks.
On Jan. 6, the C.I.A., the F.B.I. and the National Security Agency asserted with “high confidence” that “Russian efforts to influence the 2016 US presidential election” formed part of a broader, worldwide agenda “to undermine the US-led liberal democratic order.”
According to the intelligence report, “Assessing Russian Activities and Intentions in Recent US Elections,” Vladimir Putin
The intelligence assessment raises the question: what made Trump an attractive vehicle through which to attempt to weaken the liberal democratic order. Why him?
Brendan Nyhan, a professor of government at Dartmouth and a contributor to The Upshot, made the case succinctly:
On Oct. 13 in National Review, the conservative columnist Charles Krauthammer argued that Trump’s
I asked several other political analysts to give me their view of Trump’s appeal to those seeking to destabilize the American political order.
Norman Ornstein, a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, sent me his thoughts:
Heather Conley, the director of the Europe Program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies (a center-right think tank) and a co-author of the recently released report, “The Kremlin Playbook,” gave me her view of Trump’s allure for hackers:
Conley continued:
There are those who dispute the conclusions of the government’s intelligence report.
Glenn Greenwald, who has written critically of domestic surveillance by the United States government,  argues that “on the key claims — that Putin directed this hacking and that he did so to elect Donald Trump — there is no evidence for it.” Matt Taibbi, a contributing editor at Rolling Stone who spent several years reporting in Russia, contended that the “report is long on jargon but short on specifics.”
Anne Applebaum, a Washington Post columnist who is also a longtime writer on Russia, presents a counterargument to Greenwald and Taibbi: forget the intelligence report, she suggests, there is more than enough publicly available material to support the charge of Russian involvement.
“Instead of wasting more time” debating the contents of the report, Applebaum wrote on Jan. 13, “maybe we ought to abandon our obsession with ‘secrets’ and ‘spies’ and look at what is sitting in front of us.”
Here is Applebaum’s case.
First, “Trump’s real estate empire relies, though we don’t know how much, on Russian money.”
Second, Applebaum writes,
Third, according to Applebaum, “Trump operatives at the convention altered the Republican Party platform” to eliminate a call to provide arms to Ukrainians who are resisting a Russian takeover.
Fourth:
Finally, Applebaum argues as evidence of Trump’s pro-Russia tilt that
All this provides the basis for Applebaum’s conclusion:
During the past nine days, a highly contentious debate has emerged over the validity and accuracy of a leaked, unverified 35-page dossier put together by a former British MI6 official. The dossier, financed by Trump opponents, both Republican and Democratic — claims that Russia has gathered compromising sexual and financial material about Trump.
Many of the domestic and foreign policy experts I contacted suggested that Russia would not need to blackmail Trump to get what it wanted — that Trump’s susceptibility to praise has made him vulnerable to manipulation.
David Leege, a professor emeritus of political science at Notre Dame, wrote me:
Along similar lines, Sandy Maisel, a political scientist at Colby, argued that Trump’s
Gary Jacobson, a political scientist at the University of California, San Diego, was outspoken in his response to my question asking why the Russians favored Trump:
Fred Wertheimer, founder and president of Democracy 21, a nonpartisan organization promoting campaign finance reform, agreed that
Putin’s major objective, Wertheimer wrote by email, is
In an interview on Jan. 16 with the Times of London and Germany’s Bild, Trump repeated his assertion that NATO is “obsolete” and suggested that sanctions against Russia could be dropped in return for a reduction of nuclear arms.
Molly McKew, a consultant who has advised such anti-Putin government leaders as Mikheil Saakashvili, a former president of Georgia, and Vlad Filat, a former prime minister of Moldova, published an essay in Politico Magazine on Jan. 1. “Putin’s Real Long Game,” McKew argued, is to capitalize on Europe’s struggle with surging immigration and economic stagnation. As she put it:
This threat, McKew warns, should not be taken lightly:
How do “kompromat” and cyber hacking corrode public belief in verifiable truth?
In a Jan. 15 Times article, my colleague Amanda Taub writes:
Masha Gessen, writing in The Times on Jan. 14, noted that in the debate over Russia’s role in the election,
Over the next few months, the Senate Intelligence Committee plans to investigate foreign influence in the 2016 election, an inquiry that will test the independence and integrity of the Republican-controlled Congress.
The fact is, though, that despite Russia’s campaign, Trump won under democratic rules, with his contempt for behavioral and political norms on incessant display. He carried a majority of the Electoral College, more counties than any Republican candidate since 1984 and two million more votes than Mitt Romney collected in 2012.
This means that we are facing the prospect of a renegade commander in chief armed with the considerable powers of the executive branch and a seemingly compliant legislature. Trump has already dealt a body blow to the political process. We will soon learn how much harm he can inflict once in office.
