We are in uncharted waters. The New York Times is one of many venues that has made repeated mention of this.
It started just after President Trump’s inauguration. In an article on Feb. 2, for example, the correspondent Julie Hirschfeld Davis reported on Melania Trump and her role in the White House. Quoting Myra Gutin, a professor at Rider University who specializes in first ladies, Ms. Davis wrote, “We are in uncharted territory here.”
Readers found themselves in the same uncharted territory the following day when, in “The Trump Effect: What’s an Investor to Do?”, The Times’s business columnist Gretchen Morgenson concluded: “Investors should also acknowledge that we are in uncharted territory.”
Uncharted terrain was old news on March 1 when, in an article about President Trump’s Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke, the reporter Julie Turkewitz cited a policy expert on the direction of the president’s likely Interior policy: “He’s going to be moving into uncharted territory if he does that.”
Do a Google search, and the uncharted territory looks well-charted. A search for “President Trump” and “uncharted territory” produced 27,500 results (in 0.44 seconds).
“Highly unusual.” These words too have turned up with increased frequency in Times articles and opinion pieces about the new president’s decisions, announcements and actions during his first months in office.
The administration’s decision to bar journalists from The New York Times and several other news organizations from attending a press briefing constituted what the paper termed “a highly unusual breach of relations between the White House and its press corps.” The decision to mention classified so-called black sites in an executive order? “Highly unusual.” Announcing that two final contenders would travel to Washington for Mr. Trump’s Jan. 31 Supreme Court nomination announcement? “Highly unusual.” You can guess the words the Times editorial board used on March 5 in “When One President Smears Another” to describe Mr. Trump’s assertions about President Obama. Yesterday, the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, James B. Comey, publicly acknowledged the agency's investigation into Russian election interference; before he did, he acknowledged that it is “unusual” for the F.B.I. to confirm or deny the existence of any investigations, but said that it could do so in “unusual circumstances.”
The word “unprecedented” has popped up too. It has been used to describe Mr. Trump’s weekend White House in Florida, the volume and frequency of White House leaks during his still-new term, the opposition to his cabinet choices, and the security challenges the president’s Trump Tower presents.
Phil Corbett, The Times’s editor of standards and practices, addressed the question of when exactly “highly unusual” events become usual, and when an unprecedented course of events become, well, precedented: “Obviously and by definition, something can only be ‘unprecedented’ once,” writes Mr. Corbett. “And, to avoid hype, the Times stylebook urges that we specify what aspect of something really qualifies as ‘unprecedented.’ Overall, the idea is: Use with care.
“As for ‘unusual,’ it’s probably also a good idea to provide context for that description — especially, as you say, if the ‘unusual’ starts to become the norm. In some cases, perhaps one could say something like ‘which was unusual in past administrations’ or ‘which was rare under previous presidencies.’ ”
