Listen and subscribe from your mobile device: On iPhone or iPad | On Android via RadioPublic | Via Stitcher
President Trump is proposing a tax plan that Nancy Pelosi, the House minority leader, has called “a wish list for billionaires.”
What can we learn about this administration from the taxes it would cut?
On today’s episode:
• Jesse Drucker, a business reporter at The Times and a tax expert, places the proposed plan in the context of tax policy history.
• We look at three moments from a big week: hard-line conservatives revived the health care bill they had killed, the Supreme Court justices get heated, and a Facebook executive is surprised by the power of the social media giant.
To cover those topics, we went to Jennifer Steinhauer, a Times reporter who covers Congress; Adam Liptak, our Supreme Court reporter; and Sheryl Sandberg, the chief operating officer of Facebook, who was interviewed for Friday’s episode of the Book Review podcast.
Background reading:
• The seven key elements of the White House tax plan.
• Caitlin Shanagan reviews Ms. Sandberg’s new book, “Option B.”
Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb. And if that isn’t enough, we can even text.
If you don’t see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.
On your iPhone or iPad:
Open the preloaded app called Podcasts; it has a purple icon. If you’re reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “The Daily.”)
Once you’re on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “subscribe” button to have new episodes sent to your phone free.
Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)
On your Android phone or tablet:
You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’re reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.
Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)
From a desktop or laptop:
Click the “play” button above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’re doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.
On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:
Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “settings,” then “flash briefing,” then “get more flash briefing content.” Look for “The New York Times” and select “enable skill.” Now you can say, “Alexa, what’s my flash briefing?” and you will hear that day’s episode of “The Daily.”
On Google Home:
You can say, “O.K., Google, play New York Times news” to listen to that day’s episode of “The Daily.”
