SOCHI, Russia — Germany, the World Cup champion, joined Chile, Mexico and Portugal in reaching the Confederations Cup semifinals on Sunday with a 3-1 victory over a Cameroon side reduced to 10 men after further confusion with experimental video replays.
Germany was leading through Kerem Demirbay’s 48th-minute goal when a case of mistaken identity halfway through the second half — precisely the kind of situation that video replay is meant to correct — left Cameroon, the African champion, irritated.
Sebastien Siani was dismissed for a challenge on Germany’s Emre Can after the referee, Wilmar Roldan of Colombia, inspected a field-side monitor. But it took furious protests from the Cameroon players, including Siani’s sarcastically applauding Roldan, for the referee to check the monitor again and discover he had sent off the wrong player.
Siani was called back on to the field, and Ernest Mabouka was — correctly — sent off.
Germany extended its lead two minutes after the red card on a diving header from Timo Werner. There were flickers of a comeback by Cameroon when Vincent Aboubakar’s flicked header slipped through Marc-André ter Stegen’s raised hands, but Werner scored again in the 81st minute to secure the 100th victory for Joachim Löw in his 150th match in charge of Germany.
In Sunday’s other match, in Moscow, Martín Rodríguez salvaged a 1-1 tie for Chile against a tenacious Australian side to ensure Chile also qualified for this week’s semifinals.
The Australians took the lead in the 42nd minute when James Troisi delicately chipped the ball in after a pass from Robbie Kruse, and then went in pursuit of a second goal that could have qualified them at Chile’s expense.
But Chile, cheered by thousands of traveling fans, held on and tied the score in the 67th minute when Eduardo Vargas flicked the ball to Rodríguez, who hit it past goalkeeper Maty Ryan.
By securing the top spot in Group B of the World Cup warm-up tournament, the inexperienced German squad, playing without many of its 2014 World Cup winners, will now remain in Sochi and play Mexico on Thursday.
The other semifinal, on Wednesday, will match Chile against Portugal in Kazan, Russia.
