The title contenders Portugal and Mexico fought to a 2-2 draw in the Confederations Cup on Sunday, with each team scoring in the final five minutes in Kazan, Russia.
Portugal appeared to be on its way to a win after Cédric Soares scored on a deflected shot in the 86th minute, but Héctor Moreno tied the match for Mexico with a header in stoppage time.
Cristiano Ronaldo had set up Ricardo Quaresma’s opening goal for Portugal, and Javier Hernández, who is known as Chicharito, tied the score for Mexico just before halftime.
The result left Portugal, the European champion, and Mexico, winner of the Gold Cup, trailing host Russia in Group A. Russia opened the tournament with a 2-0 win over New Zealand on Saturday.
Soares’s goal had to be confirmed by video review, but it stood. An apparent first-half goal by Portugal’s Nani was disallowed after a video review, when the game was scoreless.
“In the end, it was a well-deserved result after how we played today,” Mexico Coach Juan Carlos Osorio said. “We faced the European champions, a team that plays at a very high level, and we played equal to them. It was a great result for Mexican football.”
Mexico controlled possession and spent more time on Portugal’s side of the field, but Portugal was a constant threat on the counterattack in front of 34,372 fans at Kazan Arena.
Portugal Coach Fernando Santos said it was not the performance he expected from his team.
“We know we didn’t play well,” he said. “Mexico was better, more aggressive. We played without confidence, couldn’t connect two or three passes. It was a fair result for how the teams played.”
Ronaldo played well and assisted on the first goal but did not score.
Ronaldo made a great run from near midfield to set up Quaresma’s 34th-minute goal. Ronaldo carried the ball into the penalty area but was surrounded by three defenders, so he passed to Quaresma, who was free on the far side of the box. Quaresma used one touch to fake Mexico goalkeeper Guillermo Ochoa, then easily found the open net.
Mexico tied the match less than 10 minutes later with a close-range diving header by Chicharito after Portugal defender Raphaël Guerreiro failed to clear a ball. Mexico midfielder Carlos Vela got to the ball near the far post and sent it to Chicharito for the goal.
CHILE DEFEATS CAMEROON Arturo Vidal brushed off a disputed video review to give Chile a victory over Cameroon in a Confederations Cup match in Moscow.
Vidal’s 81st-minute header after a pass from the substitute Alexis Sánchez gave the South American champions a Group B win.
The Chileans thought they had taken the lead in first-half stoppage time when Eduardo Vargas slotted the ball past Fabrice Ondoa after a pass from Vidal.
The referee Damir Skomina awarded the goal, and Chile’s players began an elaborate celebration, but the decision was then sent for video review.
Players milled about in confusion, and Chile’s fans struggled to understand what was going on.
The review found Vargas was offside by a matter of inches, enraging him and Vidal, who angrily petitioned Skomina when he blew the whistle for halftime.
After Vidal put Chile ahead in the 80th, Vargas scored Chile’s second goal — but only after another review.
After Sánchez charged through the Cameroonian defense, his shot was denied by Ondoa, but Vargas scored on the rebound. The review found Sánchez had not been offside when he received the ball.
RED BULLS SHUT OUT UNION Bradley Wright-Phillips scored two late goals, and the Red Bulls beat the Philadelphia Union, 2-0, in Chester, Pa.
On a cross from Kemar Lawrence, Wright-Phillips put a sliding one-touch kick into the net from just inside the six-yard box in the 87th minute to give the Red Bulls (7-7-2) a 1-0 lead. It was the Red Bulls’ first road goal since Wright-Phillips scored in the 13th minute of a 4-1 loss at Houston on April 1, halting a drought of more than 520 minutes. He added his eighth of the season in the second minute of stoppage time.
Philadelphia (4-7-4) played a man down after Derrick Jones was given a straight red card for a foul on Felipe Martins in the 53rd minute.
