At a roundabout at the main entrance to Erin Hills Golf Club in Wisconsin, the founder and original owner, Bob Lang, built a modest wooden sign of four planks stacked one on top of the other. The top plank, in script lettering, said, “Welcome to Erin Hills.” The second one said, “2008 U.S. Women’s Amateur Public Links,” and the third “2011 U.S. Amateur,” in recognition of two prominent championships held there.
The fourth plank was intentionally left blank.
Lang, 72, amassed his fortune publishing greeting cards and calendars as well as in real estate, then spent it to pursue his dream of filling the fourth plank by bringing a United States Open to his home state, where it had never been played. To do so, Lang bought a sprawling former cattle farm in 2001 and set about on what appeared to be a fool’s errand: to bring the golf world to a windswept public course on a two-lane country road in the small hamlet of Erin.
Lang’s dream will become reality on Thursday when the 117th U.S. Open begins at Erin Hills. But Lang will be just another spectator; his beloved sign was removed by the current owners.
“He had this dream,” said David B. Fay, the executive director of the United States Golf Association for 21 years through 2010, “and I think it became an obsession.”
Erin Hills, 35 miles northwest of Milwaukee in the Kettle Moraine hills, is built into rugged landscape left behind when the last retreating glaciers carved natural fairway corridors and green sites about 11,000 years ago.
“Nirvana,” is how Michael Hurdzan, the golf course architect, described it.
Hurdzan and Dana Fry, who partnered with Ron Whitten, the architectural editor for Golf Digest magazine, won the bid to build the course over finalists who included Jack Nicklaus and Tom Doak.
That was just the beginning.
After three years, construction still had not begun. The combination of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks and an adverse business climate for Lang’s primary business had him on the verge of selling the land. Then Whitten proposed to Hurdzan that they present the natural theater that is Erin Hills as a potential U.S. Open site to light a fire under Lang. Hurdzan considered the notion outlandish.
“I still remember Mike saying, ‘The U.S.G.A. is never going to take the U.S. Open to a brand-new public golf course in the middle of nowhere in Wisconsin,’ ” Whitten said. “I said, ‘I know that and you know that, but Bob doesn’t know that.’ ”
The pitch struck a chord with Lang. On July 24, 2003, Whitten sent an email to Mike Davis, then the U.S. Open championship director, inviting him to visit the site. He included the bold prediction that Erin Hills would “ultimately be a better Open site than the Straits Course at Whistling Straits,” a reference to Wisconsin’s best-known course, which most recently hosted the 2015 P.G.A. Championship.
“If I got that from somebody who didn’t know what they were saying, I’d kind of go, thank you very much, I appreciate it, but this is Ron Whitten,” said Davis, who was named the U.S.G.A.’s executive director in 2011 and has since added the title of chief executive officer. “So I had to respond to it.”
He promised to visit. On Aug. 10, 2004, on the way to the P.G.A. Championship at Whistling Straits, Davis kept his word. He drove through pastureland on what felt like a wild-goose chase until his car ascended Holy Hill, he said. In the distance were the twin steeples of a Carmelite basilica and country that seemed heaven sent for a golf course.
He walked the property for four and a quarter hours (Lang timed it). Whitten had stuck a flagged broomstick where the 14th green was to be.
“It was Shinnecock on steroids,” Davis said, referring to Shinnecock Hills, the famed Long Island course that is scheduled to host its fifth U.S. Open in 2018. He left convinced that he had seen as fine a property for a golf course as could be found in America.
“It was screaming out for a golf course to be built,” Davis said.
Emboldened, Lang called the bank the next day, took out a loan and began construction in earnest. A few months later, Davis returned with Fay, who was so impressed that he awarded Erin Hills the 2008 Women’s Amateur Public Links, a lesser and now defunct championship, before the course was even seeded.
It was an unprecedented move that placed Erin Hills on the fast track to hosting the U.S. Open. Already, Lang had begun to fixate on the possibility.
“U.S. Open 2017,” he wrote in an email dated June 3, 2006. “I’ll bet everything I own.”
The course opened prematurely in August 2006, and while Golf magazine named Erin Hills the year’s best new public layout, others condemned it. Bradley S. Klein, senior writer for Golfweek, christened it Errant Hills.
Nevertheless, in 2008, the U.S.G.A. announced that Erin Hills would host the 2011 U.S. Amateur, which is widely considered a steppingstone to the ultimate prize of the U.S. Open. Davis mentioned some course enhancements; Lang heard face-lift.
He took out another loan and added 103 bunkers; built tees that stretched the course to over 8,000 yards and a par 73; bulldozed a green without the architect’s consent; kicked Whitten off the team; and spent frivolously to buy homes that tarnished the course’s vistas.
“He kept buying houses because he didn’t want to see a house from the golf course,” Whitten said. “He’d pay a ridiculous amount.”
As obsessed as the fictional Ray Kinsella in the movie “Field of Dreams,” Lang nevertheless felt the financial strain. Driving home from the course one day in July 2009, he pulled over in front of an old tavern.
“I had a come-to-Jesus with myself,” he said. “I had no choice. I had to sell.”
With Lang on the verge of insolvency, Jim Reinhart, a former U.S.G.A. executive committee member and general chairman of the 2017 U.S. Open, orchestrated the sale of Erin Hills to Andy Ziegler and his wife, Carlene. They were the co-founders of Artisan Partners Holdings, a Milwaukee-based global investment management firm.
Initially, Ziegler balked at a deal, but he agreed to fly to Tulsa, Okla., site of the 2009 U.S. Amateur, and listened as Reinhart broke the news to the U.S.G.A. leadership that Lang faced foreclosure and that the condition of the course would never meet U.S.G.A. standards for the U.S. Amateur by 2011.
“Andy was ready to throw in the towel and I recall saying, ‘Please, hang in there. It could be a spectacular U.S. Open site,’ ” Fay said. “I think that became the motivating factor to getting it all done.”
The sale price for the course — not including other considerations — was $10,041,900 according to Washington County tax records. Lang said he had spent more than $25 million on it.
On Oct. 23, 2009, the same day that Lang officially sold Erin Hills, the U.S.G.A. executive committee voted to hold the 2017 U.S. Open there.
On June 16, 2010, the eve of the U.S. Open at Pebble Beach, the U.S.G.A. announced the decision. Erin Hills won out over more prominent Midwestern courses, like Cog Hill outside Chicago.
Erin Hills, which does not have many trees save for a few specimen oaks, is designed to play fast and firm if the weather cooperates. The course, set on 652 acres, has been closed since last fall to ensure that its bentgrass greens and dangerous fescue fairways are in pristine condition for the tournament.
It will measure 7,741 yards, and will be played as a par 72 for the first time at a U.S. Open since 1992.
Even Klein, the golf architecture critic, changed his tune. “I’ve seen every iteration and each time it’s gotten less worse and now it’s finally gotten better,” he said. “It’s actually fun to play.”
Ziegler is being hailed as the savior of the U.S. Open at Erin Hills. Without his financial resources and vision for the project, the Open would have been lost. But all parties involved say there wouldn’t be an Erin Hills without Lang, who regrets the loss of the wooden sign that was meant to bear the words “2017 U.S. Open.”
If only someone knew where to find it.
“It has haunted me for eight years,” Lang said. “That sign tells the story of Erin Hills and what the journey to the U.S. Open was all about.”
