PARIS — Tennis does two story lines particularly well: history and novelty.
It was thus quite a final weekend at the French Open. There was the thrill of the new with Jelena Ostapenko, an unseeded 20-year-old, winning the women’s singles title by swinging for the lines without fear or favor.
There was “La Décima” for Rafael Nadal, still hungry for more 12 years after his first title in Paris.
It has been a tennis season for the perennials: Roger Federer, Serena Williams and Nadal have all won major singles titles in their 30s.
But Ostapenko’s surprise run and her come-from-behind upset of Simona Halep in the final made it clear that the game is not trapped in amber.
“At the moment, you can have a dartboard and you could throw a dart and any number of women can step up and make it through to a final or win one of these tournaments,” said Darren Cahill, Halep’s coach. “I think that creates a lot of interest in the women’s game, and we just want to create some rivalries now. I’d love to see Jelena back this up and continue to play well.”
For now, she is up to No. 12 from No. 47 in the rankings. Her flat-hitting game is actually better suited to grass and to Wimbledon, where she won the girls’ title in 2014. But there are no guarantees that she will hit new heights in a hurry.
Sudden fame can be a burden, and her high-risk approach gives her, for now, little margin for error. Her serve also has technical deficiencies, which could lead to trouble under pressure.
There are plenty of reminders about the pitfalls.
One of the women Ostapenko defeated with relative ease in Paris was Monica Puig, the surprise 2016 Olympic gold medalist from Puerto Rico who has reached no finals (and only one semifinal) since her victory in Rio de Janeiro. She is ranked No. 53 this week.
Garbiñe Muguruza, last year’s young and big-hitting French Open champion, has struggled openly with the pressure and with developing a Plan B when her own high-risk game falters. She is now out of the top 10.
Madison Keys, another young and gifted player with just as much easy baseline power as Ostapenko, has battled with injuries and consistency and has fallen out of the top 10, too.
Cahill is correct that the women’s game needs genuine rivalries at the top. There has been a dearth of them for far too long while the men’s game has continued to thrive because of them.
Federer, Nadal, Andy Murray, Novak Djokovic and the late arrival Stan Wawrinka have played one another and played off one another with enough regularity over the last decade to create appointment viewing.
This week, with all of them now in their 30s, they are still in the top five of the rankings. Nadal is back up to No. 2, his highest ranking since 2014. And the band looks set to get together again at Wimbledon.
Federer skipped the clay-court season and has not played a tour event since winning the Miami Open on April 2. But he will return to competition on Wednesday at the grass-court event in Stuttgart, Germany, possibly against his close friend Tommy Haas, who first has to win his opening-round match against Pierre-Hugues Herbert.
Federer plans to play both Stuttgart and Halle before Wimbledon, where he has won seven times but not since 2012. Nadal has won two titles at the All England Club and reached three other finals, but he has won only five matches total at Wimbledon since 2011, losing twice in the second round and once in the first round.
He missed the event last year because of a left-wrist injury, but what worries him most at this stage is his knees.
“I played five finals at Wimbledon, but since I’ve had problems with my knees, since 2012, playing on grass has been more complicated for me,” he said. “Playing on grass is very particular. You need to get down very low. You have less stability, but I like playing on it.”
A good omen: The other two years he won the French Open without dropping a set (2008 and 2010), he won Wimbledon, too.
“On grass, anything can happen,” Nadal said. “I could win the first two matches, and then the story could change. The first matches are always very dangerous.”
A little danger would be refreshing after Roland Garros, where Nadal was again in a class of his own. He is a different player than he was in 2005, the year he won his first French Open. He is more ruthlessly efficient, favoring shorter rallies. His service grip and service power have improved. His two-handed backhand is a fuller, more consistently penetrating stroke, which means that he no longer needs or wants to run around it as often to rip his trademark forehands. That leaves even less open space for his would-be rivals to attack.
Like Federer, his career-long rival, Nadal has evolved to endure, but not even Federer has won 10 titles at the same Grand Slam tournament.
“Rafa is a normal person doing abnormal things,” said Guillermo Vilas, the former French Open champion and part-time poet from Argentina.
Nadal’s life has, of course, been anything but normal since he became a star in Spain by leading his country to the Davis Cup title in Seville in 2004 by defeating Andy Roddick of the United States in the opening match at age 18.
He is treated like a celebrity in Spain and abroad and is certainly accustomed to his luxuries, but his upbringing and connection to family and his home island of Majorca have — against the odds — kept him grounded.
“For sure, I have doubts,” he said when asked about the three-year gap between his last Grand Slam singles title, in 2014, and the title he won Sunday. “During that three years, I had doubts. Right now, I’m going to have doubts even in a few days, because in tennis, every week is a new story, and that’s part of the beautiful thing of our sport. Life is not that clear. So if you have no doubts, probably it’s because you are too arrogant. I don’t consider myself arrogant at all.”
In Nadal’s mind, humility has pushed him to keep pushing. “For that reason, I am having the success that I had,” he said.
It is a fine theory. Even if he has sometimes risked sounding falsely modest, the principle of giving every opponent and every match their due has been a remarkably effective formula.
It has added up to 10 French Open singles titles, and in light of the formula and his own gifts, an 11th is hardly out of the question.
