Terence Crawford will defend his world super lightweight title against Felix Diaz in the main event at Madison Square Garden on Saturday night.
But that might be the least daunting test Crawford faces in his immediate future.
Next month, the appeal of his misdemeanor convictions last September — for property damage and disorderly conduct after a dispute in an Omaha auto body shop — comes before a judge, and he could wind up in jail.
Two months ago, he reportedly pulled out a gun to break up a brawl between two female acquaintances, prompting the Omaha police to detain him for questioning. He was released, the gun was returned and no criminal charges were filed after Crawford produced a concealed-carry permit.
But both episodes are reminders that although boxing has taken Crawford around the world and given him a measure of wealth, fame and perspective, in some ways he has never left the gritty environment in which he grew up.
The result is that Crawford, four months from his 30th birthday, is something of a contradiction. He grew up angry, his formative years filled with too many forays into gang life. And based on those episodes in Omaha, his hometown, that anger still seems capable of getting him into trouble.
And yet he has grown, too, through two eye-opening trips to Rwanda with a mentor who was once his fourth-grade teacher, and through his decision to open a nonprofit boxing gym in the neighborhood where he grew up.
He fights in the ring with a fluid and reckless abandon, and an instinctive generosity resides inside him. It appeared when he gave away his United States team jackets to appreciative Venezuelan teenagers after winning a gold medal at the Pan-American Games in 2007, and when he left behind every article of clothing he brought on his first visit to Rwanda in 2014.
So who is Terence Crawford?
“He’s a person who people will love if he’ll only allow them to,’’ said Jamie Nollette, the fourth-grade teacher who steered him toward Rwanda after reconnecting with him years later.
“Terence’s greatest strength is also his greatest weakness,’’ she added. “Terence is so strong-willed, and when he feels betrayed, it’s hard for him to get over that. He feels like he’s trying so hard to do the right things, to be a good person, but people only see a small picture of him, and that’s not who he really is.’’
As a boxer, of course, Crawford’s narrative is less complicated. He is unbeaten in 30 fights, with 21 knockouts, and his name appears on just about every list of the top five pound-for-pound boxers.
Crawford has been mentioned as a possible opponent for Manny Pacquiao this year, and he believes he can do unto Pacquiao what Pacquiao did unto Oscar De La Hoya in 2008 — deliver a victory that would catapult him to worldwide prominence.
It would be a lasting affirmation for the path he chose as a wayward inner-city kid — finding that boxing was something he was good at. He won many amateur tournaments before earning Pan Am gold in 2007, turned pro a year later and then kept winning, capped by his 2014 victory over Scotland’s Ricky Burns for the World Boxing Organization lightweight title in Glasgow.
Along the way, his career nearly derailed after a street-corner dice game in Omaha in 2008. A bullet fired by a gang member smashed through the windshield of the car he was driving, rattled around the interior and lodged itself in the back of his skull. But Crawford was able to drive to the hospital and suffered no permanent damage, other than the quarter-sized dent behind his right ear.
In a recent interview, he recalled his first reaction to what had happened — “I was furious. I wasn’t thinking about nothing but revenge. I wanted to find the guy and kill him.” — and how, gradually, he was able to calm down and reason with himself.
“I realized that wasn’t doing me any good,” he said. “That wasn’t going to get me where I wanted to so I just started focusing on boxing, and everything just changed for me, dramatically. I took it as a wake-up call. It was like God blessed me with a second chance.”
As Crawford emerged as a boxer, Nollette left the teaching profession, moved from Omaha to Arizona, and found her calling with a nonprofit organization that drills wells for drinking water in Africa. Eventually, a former colleague told her that Terence Crawford, the rambunctious 9-year-old who always tried to get her attention, was now a prominent boxer.
She sent him a congratulatory message through Facebook and was pleasantly surprised when she quickly received a response.
“I know it’s easy to say now, but Terence was always my favorite,” she said. “He really just always would want to do something to make me proud, and I could tell he needed that positive reinforcement.”
Crawford said: “Whenever anyone asked me who my favorite teacher was, I would always say ‘Miss Nollette.’ I just always felt she cared about me.’’
The two met for lunch and Crawford asked if he could accompany her to Rwanda. Six weeks later, that is where they were, learning about a method of reconciliation that seemed as foreign to him as the African food.
A woman whose husband and child had been victims of the Rwandan genocide in 1994 and a man involved in the mass killings shared ownership of a dairy cow as part of a Cow for Peace program in Rwanda.
The concept was simple, yet mind-boggling, and Crawford said he regarded the scene with disbelief.
“Where I come from,” he told his traveling companions that night at dinner, “we believe in an eye for an eye. That’s what we do. That’s just the way it is.”
And yet, Crawford admitted, he could not help thinking about the program’s message — that, in effect, anything is possible.
There was more, some of it painful. While in Rwanda, Crawford, Nollette and others on the trip attended a memorial to the genocide victims.
“To actually see the little baby skulls that’s cracked and broke from getting hit in the head with axes and stuff like that — it’s heartbreaking,” Crawford said. “I never knew things like that even happened.”
Crawford learned, too, about the joy Rwandans could find in the things that a child from north Omaha took for granted.
“You think we got it bad in Omaha, or in any city in the United States, and then you go to a different country and you see how bad they got it,” he said. “You give those people a balloon and they’ll cherish it like you gave them a chunk of gold.”
Back in Omaha, Crawford began laying the groundwork for the B&B Boxing Academy, which requires its young members to bring their report cards to maintain their status, and which offers tutoring and mentoring services.
But he also ran into trouble. The body shop incident occurred in April 2016 after a dispute with the owner, whom Crawford believed had overcharged him for subpar work on his car. Crawford lowered his car from a hydraulic lift and pushed it out of the shop, which caused a reported $5,000 worth of damage to the shop’s equipment.
He was convicted on two of three criminal counts — an assault charge was dropped — and was sentenced to 90 days, which was later reduced to 53. He served only eight hours before he was released, pending his appeal next month.
Then came the incident in March. “I try to tell him he can’t get involved in those things anymore,” Nollette said. “But believe me, 10 years ago would have ended a lot differently. He’s come a long way.”
Crawford acknowledges there is residual anger from his childhood. “As a kid, my temper was on Cloud 10,” he said. “Anything you say, I would just jump on you, you know?” But he also has the awareness that there is another way.
He has reconciled with his father, whom he long resented for often being away in the Navy while he was growing up. Both of Crawford’s parents, Terence Sr. and Debra, will be at Saturday’s fight.
Nollette, a mother of three, will instead be attending the high school graduation of her son, Sam. But her family will watch the fight on TV.
Crawford said he remembered how he used to feel because his parents were never at any of his boxing tournaments. “You look around and you see everybody else’s parents cheering them on, and it makes you feel bad. These are the things you can’t get back.”
So when his young son, Terence III — one of five children he has with his longtime girlfriend, Esha Person — competed in a wrestling tournament last month, Crawford left his training camp in Colorado Springs to watch him compete in Reno, Nev.
He was being a good father. He is intent on being a role model. He is also within reach of greater riches as a boxer. And looming is that court case next month. It is a complicated and ongoing story.
