PONTE VEDRA BEACH, Fla. — How tough were the conditions during the third round of the Players Championship? Forty-nine of the 82 players who advanced to the weekend at T.P.C. Sawgrass recorded at least one double bogey — or worse — on Saturday.
J. B. Holmes hit only five fairways, but he wielded his putter like a Wite-Out brush to erase his miscues from tee to green. With a two-under-par 70, which included 25 putts, Holmes went into the final round sharing the lead, at nine-under 207, with his fellow American Kyle Stanley, who recorded a 72.
The field was besieged by a blustery southern wind that further dried out greens that were already hard and fast. A light morning rain did little to blunt the edges of a course that left little margin for error.
That wind swept Matt Kuchar, the 2012 champion here, out of the tournament after he shot an 81. The worst score of the day was posted by the rookie Jon Rahm, who began the day tied for 10th at four under but, like Kuchar, missed the second cut after scoring bogey or worse on nine of his holes and finishing with an 82.
“I kept getting pounded and pounded,” said Rahm, one of 11 players who were cut from the oversize field at the conclusion of the third round.
He added: “I had five putts in the first four holes, and I was three over par. So putting was working, and then after that, things just went down.”
Vijay Singh, 54, started the day in fourth place and fell to a tie for 31st after a 79. Phil Mickelson dropped from two under at the start of the day to four over with a 78 and was tied for 67th going into Sunday.
But not all the sounds on the tournament’s moving day were thuds. After making the cut with no strokes to spare, Pat Perez played in the third group out and posted the day’s lowest score, 66, to vault into a tie for 10th. Sergio García, the 2008 champion, making his first start since breaking an 0-for-73 drought in the majors with a victory at the Masters, stood at four over after six holes on Thursday. In the 48 holes since, he is nine under.
“I felt like a little bit in chains on Thursday because I was thinking, ‘Come on — you have to play well after winning the Masters,’” García said after shooting a third-round 67 to move into a tie for seventh, four strokes off the lead.
García said he had been a little cautious during the first two days but had felt more at ease on Saturday.
“So today, even though it was much tougher with the windy conditions and how gusty it was out there, I was able to hit some really, really quality shots and some great putts,” he said.
As befits the signature event of a tour with a global membership, the top six players on the leaderboard represented five countries. Behind the two Americans, Louis Oosthuizen of South Africa was in third place, one stroke back, after shooting a 73. Another shot back was Si Woo Kim of South Korea (68). Sitting three strokes out of the lead were Emiliano Grillo of Argentina (67) and the Englishman Ian Poulter (71).
