A son of the former Penn State football coach Joe Paterno who has been a staunch defender of his father’s legacy was elected to the university’s board of trustees on Friday.
Jay Paterno received the most votes in the alumni election for trustee.
“Being elected to Penn State’s board of trustees is and should always be a call to service,” he said in a statement Friday, adding that he hoped to “build on the enduring pride and values that have never wavered” at the university.
There are 38 trustees, and alumni vote for nine seats; three are on the ballot each year. Paterno will start his new role in July.
Joe Paterno, one of the most successful coaches in college football history, was fired in 2011, just days after the arrest of his former assistant Jerry Sandusky. Joe Paterno died of lung cancer early the next year at 85.
University trustees later said that one of the reasons they had removed Joe Paterno was his handling of the 2001 complaint by another assistant who had seen Sandusky molesting a boy in a shower in the team’s locker room.
Joe Paterno passed the information along to the president at the time, Graham B. Spanier, and two other high-level administrators, but no one ever reported the incident to the police or to the child-welfare authorities. All three former administrators were convicted this year of child endangerment for their handling of the complaint.
Joe Paterno was never charged with a crime, but a university-commissioned review of the scandal concluded that he and the other administrators had remained silent out of a concern for bad publicity.
Sandusky continued to abuse boys until his 2011 arrest. He is now serving a sentence of 30 to 60 years for sexually abusing 10 boys. He is appealing the conviction and maintains his innocence.
Jay Paterno has been a fierce defender of his father.
In a book he published in 2014, he said he was not writing to exonerate his father “because he did not commit a crime that needs a pardon.”
“If anything, he is guilty of failing to possess the godlike qualities ascribed to him by others, qualities that Joe was the first to insist he never had,” Jay Paterno wrote.
He called his father’s firing by the trustees “an act of cowardice.”
Jay Paterno was on the university’s coaching staff for 17 seasons, mostly as a quarterbacks coach.
A bronze statue of Joe Paterno was removed from outside Beaver Stadium in 2012 in the aftermath of the Sandusky scandal. Last summer, more than 200 former Penn State football players petitioned university leaders to return it. However, Jay Paterno said Friday he was not focused on the statue.
“That is something for somebody else to worry about, not me,” he said. “I’m focusing on Penn State’s future.”
