Our critics and reporters offer a glimpse of what’s moved and delighted them on YouTube. Read the rest of our classical music coverage here.
Opening her five-concert Perspectives series at Carnegie Hall on Thursday, the violinist Janine Jansen made her impact through refinement and silvery restraint. Playing chamber music, she is above all a partner, alert to minute attunements to match her fellow musicians without drawing undue attention to mere effects. She was particularly effective — detailed, rhapsodic — in Szymanowski’s “Mythes”; I love this single note, a little sigh that she calibrates to mirror the piano’s gesture perfectly. ZACHARY WOOLFE
Read our review of Ms. Jansen in concert at Carnegie Hall.
The young pianist Conrad Tao made a humble Lincoln Center debut last weekend, at 11 a.m. on a Sunday. (The center awarded him one of its Emerging Artist awards on Thursday.) But his performance did more to wake me up than the espresso served in the lobby. After closing the program with Beethoven’s Piano Sonata No. 31, he played Scarlatti for an encore. As I was leaving someone said, “I thought he’d encore with the Carter” — meaning Elliot Carter’s “Caténaires” (2006), which Mr. Tao had played for The New York Times in a recent Facebook Live concert and interview. The brief and restless work is unapologetically virtuosic, with one continuous line (no chords!) passed back and forth between the right and left hands. But Mr. Tao puts the exact amount of weight on his left hand to achieve a Bach-like implied polyphony that gives the piece deceptive complexity. JOSHUA BARONE
Watch Mr. Tao on Facebook Live.
This week, Nonesuch Records issued a teaser single from “Landfall,” Laurie Anderson’s first album with the Kronos Quartet. (The full recording is scheduled for release in February.) At first, “We Learn to Speak yet Another Language” finds the Kronos players and Ms. Anderson observing a strict division of labor. The string quartet sways with the song’s underlying vamp in an aching, romantic fashion; when it’s her turn, Ms. Anderson lingers over a chord and takes the opportunity to relate a story about a technological foul-up at a karaoke bar. By the end of the track, there is a feeling of convergence, as Ms. Anderson’s delay-heavy keyboard and electric violin are layered next to more conventional string sounds — creating a vibe both warm and spooky. SETH COLTER WALLS
“This was a case where there was something art could do to really solve a problem,” the composer David Lang said of his “symphony for a broken orchestra,” which had its premiere in Philadelphia on Sunday and which helped to fix more than 1,000 damaged instruments in the city’s severely underfunded public school music programs. The symphony was also Mr. Lang’s latest foray into community music, such as the recent reimagining of his Pulitzer Prize-winning oratorio “the little match girl passion” (2007) to add familiar songs for audience participation. That work has become a staple of the holiday season for its devastating message about homelessness and compassion. Tears are to be expected, especially in emotional passages like “Have mercy, my God,” in which the plea for mercy is cut by a tenor singing above the other voices: “My eyes are crying/My heart is crying.” JOSHUA BARONE
Read more about Mr. Lang’s “symphony for a broken orchestra.”
Last Saturday, the Miller Theater at Columbia University presented the latest in its series of Composer Portrait concerts, this one focused on the work of an alumna, Chen Yi, who graduated in 1993. Players from the Curtis Institute of Music’s 20/21 Ensemble showed how Ms. Chen’s blending of Chinese modes and Western classical styles has powered her career, right from the start. “Near Distance” was composed in 1988, when she was in her second year at Columbia, and she was already finding dramatic new possibilities for the familiar “‘Pierrot’-plus-percussion” modern-music ensemble. One of the most haunting transitions in the work comes in the final minutes, as the players move from cries of modernist unease to sustained tones and whispery percussive effects. SETH COLTER WALLS
It was just 10 years ago that the soprano Angela Meade won the Metropolitan Opera’s National Council Auditions singing “Casta diva” from Bellini’s “Norma.” This week at the Met, Ms. Meade sang Norma in the company’s new production, and her exquisite “Casta diva” was just one of many thrilling moments in a commanding performance of a daunting role. It got me looking back to performances of hers from recent years, including this magnificent “Pace, pace mio dio” from Verdi’s “La Forza del Destino,” at the 2014 Richard Tucker Gala. Listen to her rich, deep sound and unforced power. She ends with a fearless fortissimo high B flat, held for 10 seconds! Even more impressive, though, is the pianissimo high B-flat in an earlier phrase. Just gorgeous. (This year’s Tucker Gala takes place on Sunday at Carnegie Hall.) ANTHONY TOMMASINI
Read our review of Ms. Meade in “Norma.”
Joining Ms. Meade in “Norma” at the Met is the equally superb mezzo-soprano Jamie Barton as Adalgisa. Ms. Barton has also been rising fast in recent years. A turning point came in 2013, when she took first prize in the prestigious BBC Cardiff Singer of the World competition. Here she is in the final round, singing “Acerba voluttà” from Cilea’s “Adriana Lecouvreur.” In this aria, a married princess awaits a nighttime tryst with her secret lover. But will he arrive?  Ms. Barton’s performance captures the mix of nervous distress and romantic longing in the music. At the end, in a pleading phrase, she asks the wandering star of the East not to set, to prolong the night. How could any star not heed such a sumptuously sung request? (The video includes Ms. Barton’s charming performance of the witch’s aria from “Handel and Gretel.”) ANTHONY TOMMASINI
Read our profile of Ms. Barton, “opera’s nose-studded rock star.”
Read our review of the last time she and Ms. Meade sang “Norma” at the Met, in 2013.
With December comes serious drone-music activity from a downtown New York eminence. Phill Niblock’s annual winter solstice concert — stuffed with six hours of video and sound art — will descend on Roulette in Brooklyn on Dec. 21. But first, Mr. Niblock’s own Experimental Intermedia venue will present a series of eight concerts, beginning on Monday. Of particular interest is an appearance on Friday by David Lee Myers, an electronic-music explorer who composes a wide variety of soundscapes on his personalized “feedback workstation.” The performance marks the release of a recent album, “Ether Music,” on the Starkland label, which includes beat-focused electronic works (like “The Dynamics of Particles”) as well as dreamier meditations. SETH COLTER WALLS
