BET celebrates hip-hop’s prized artists and producers. And the Flash is reborn in the superhero series’ fourth season.
HIP-HOP AWARDS 8 p.m. on BET. The producer DJ Khaled hosts as the biggest names in hip-hop gather at the Jackie Gleason Theater in Miami Beach, Fla. DJ Khaled and the rappers Kendrick Lamar and Cardi B lead with nine nominations each.
THE FLASH 8 p.m. on the CW. The Season 3 finale of this DC Comics series left fans wondering how Central City would fare without the scientist-turned-superhero Barry Allen (Grant Gustin of “Glee”), known as the Flash. The fourth season opens with Iris (Candice Patton) struggling to cope with the loss of Harrison (Tom Cavanagh) and the possibility of Barry’s death. But when a new villain threatens to wreak havoc on Central City if the Flash doesn’t appear, Cisco (Carlos Valdes) tries to break Barry out of a purgatorylike realm and thrust him back into his superhuman, crime-fighting ways.
THE BIG INTERVIEW 9 p.m. on AXS TV. Dan Rather, the former anchor and managing editor of “CBS Evening News,” returns to sit down with a new batch of music figures, like the Rush bassist Geddy Lee, the singer-songwriter Jewel and members of the Doobie Brothers. His first guest this season is Sharon Osbourne, a judge on the British talent show “The X Factor” and wife of the metal singer Ozzy Osbourne. She shares her first impression of Mr. Osbourne’s band Black Sabbath (“odd” and “hairy” men that made her nervous) and how that changed when she watched them perform at a London club.
ED STAFFORD: LEFT FOR DEAD 10 p.m. on Discovery. The explorer Ed Stafford tests his survival skills with this new adventure series. In each episode a stranded Mr. Stafford has 10 days to make it out of a dangerous environment without a survival kit. A rescue team monitors him from afar, ready to save him from the wilderness if his quest for civilization goes awry.
CHRISTINA P: MOTHER INFERIOR (2017) on Netflix. The writer and comedian Christina Pazsitzky gets real about motherhood, giving birth and her own childhood in this new stand-up special. With her husband, the comedian Tom Segura, Ms. Pazsitzky is a co-host of “Your Mom’s House,” a podcast for those who appreciate seventh-grade humor.
UNZIPPED (1995) on iTunes, Amazon and Fandor. The designer Isaac Mizrahi pieces together his 1994 runway collection in this bold documentary. “‘Unzipped’ appreciates not only the loony excess that makes fashion such a high-stakes adventure, but also the monomania of Mr. Mizrahi’s creative process,” Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times. The film features footage of Cindy Crawford, Naomi Campbell and Kate Moss heeding Mr. Mizrahi’s meticulous directions, and culminates with crew members frantically dressing supermodels backstage as the action begins.
