A laid-back attitude was very much in evidence at the kickoff party for New York Fashion Week: Men’s.
The Louisiana-born men’s wear designer Billy Reid hosted the gathering, which took place Monday in the Cellar at the Beekman hotel in the financial district. It followed the unveiling of his fall 2017 collection in the same location — which was more like an old-time hootenanny than a fashion show. As models entered a small room wearing the latest Billy Reid, the blues musician Cedric Burnside (grandson of the bluesman R. L. Burnside) sang “Love Her ’Til I Die,” accompanying himself on acoustic guitar, for an audience of magazine editors and fashion fans seated at small tables.
The fashion portion of the evening ended with a recitation of the Frank O’Hara poem “Avenue A” by the Tony Award-winning actor Alex Sharp. And then it was time to party.
The gregarious Mr. Reid has become known in recent years for his Shindig, an annual event in Florence, Ala., where his brand is based, that features lavish meals, live music, dancing and a runway show. “We wanted to bring a little piece of that to New York,” Mr. Reid said.
What that meant: a live jazz band, old-fashioned whiskey cocktails and oysters Rockefeller, all against the backdrop of the dark-wood walls, white tiles and plush couches of the recently opened Beekman Hotel, which occupies a landmark building that dates to 1883.
As the drinks flowed, a quirky mix of guests came through, including the actor and writer B. J. Novak, best known for his role in “The Office”; Karen Elson, a model and musician; and Jake Lacy, who plays Hannah Horvath’s “nice” boyfriend on the HBO show “Girls.”
Winston Marshall, a banjoist and guitarist in the indie-folk band Mumford & Sons, took over as D.J. when the musicians took a break, and he played decidedly upbeat, un-indie songs by Kendrick Lamar, Madonna, Ace of Base, Justice, R. Kelly, Beyoncé and more. Only a few guests braved the dance floor at first, including a pair of male models who practically slithered their way across the room. But once the lights dimmed toward the end of the evening, the wallflowers joined in, dancing and singing along with Mr. Marshall, who bopped and shook and even dabbed to the beat.
“It’s real, and that’s what makes it fun,” Mr. Reid said.
