The long wait for the goods from Rihanna’s debut Fenty Puma collection is over: Sneaker-stiletto boots ($600) and hoodies ($150) will be available at a pop-up opening Tuesday. Be on the lookout for 2,500 keys hidden through the city and redeemable for gift cards, gear and concert tickets. At 125 West 33rd Street.
On Sept. 8, Bottega Veneta will open a shop-in-shop at Bergdorf Goodman as part of the store’s accessories-floor face-lift. You’ll find a store-exclusive bag, the Manhattan Olimpia, in opaque nappa leather and in shiny snakeskin ($3,500). It has a new intrecciato pattern that’s an abstract rendering of the city’s street grid.
On Sept. 9, Saks will open in Brookfield Place. The store will carry a downtown edit that includes nine brands not carried at the Fifth Avenue flagship — good news should you be in the market for a Vetements hoodie ($1,050), say, or something from Haider Ackermann, Dries Van Noten or Rick Owens. At 225 Liberty Street.
That same day, Dover Street Market will host an open house from 6 to 8 p.m. Terry Richardson will sign copies of his new book, “Skinny” ($65), which chronicles Alex Bolotow, who is his girlfriend, partner and mother to their 5-month-old twins. The British men’s wear designer Charles Jeffrey will reveal an installation for his Loverboy collection. There will be treats from Rose Bakery. At 160 Lexington Avenue.
Also on Friday, in celebration of El Museo del Barrio’s retrospective of the work of the fashion illustrator Antonio Lopez, the museum will host a pop-up exhibition and “happening” from 6 to 8 p.m. It will attempt to recreate an installation Mr. Lopez and his collaborator, Juan Ramos, made by shooting pictures of partygoers on a large-format Polaroid and displaying them immediately on a gallery’s walls. At Prince Street Project Space, 127-B Prince Street.
From Sept. 9 to 11, Refinery29 will host the second edition of 29Rooms: “Powered by the People,” a multisensory installation that includes vignettes on themes of body positivity, self-acceptance, mental health and self-expression. It will have a storytelling chamber with women’s narratives created by the feminist platform Gurls Talk in partnership with the model Adwoa Aboah. At 8 Ingraham Street, Brooklyn.
On Sept. 10, Tommy Hilfiger will fete his collaboration with Gigi Hadid by creating a pop-up “Tommy Pier.” It will have fair rides, food and styles like a Tommy x Gigi nylon bomber ($295) and elastic ankle boots ($189.50) that walked down his runway the day before. At Pier 16, South Street Seaport, 19 Fulton Street.
