In the present day, Al and Earn have come to a crossroads. Al’s ready to level up in his career and Earn is little more than dead weight.
“FUBU” offers the first substantial glimpse into their past, revealing that Al has a decades-old history of carrying his cousin.
This week, we’re flashing back to the late ’90s, where a teenage Earn is stuck shopping with his mother. As any bored kid would do, he wanders off to explore something more interesting than down market home décor (though he’s a little long in the tooth for playfully plowing through the racks the way he does). He can’t believe his luck when he stumbles upon a neon yellow FUBU jersey, a rare hip-hop fashion find amid the store’s non-designer dreck.
The next morning, Earn’s so eager to show off his newly-purchased status symbol that he’s wide-eyed and alert before his alarm clock even sounds. He grins all the way to the school bus stop, no doubt triggering instant-onset nostalgia for anyone who ever cherished that adolescent fashion “first” — be it a piece of real jewelry, a pair of de rigueur sneakers or a designer purse.
He arrives at school to a chorus of exactly the kind of external validation he’d been craving. More than just impressing his peers, he manages to get a smile and a compliment from his crush, an epic feat for a teen who hasn’t yet infiltrated the in-crowd.
His swelling ego gets punctured by the entrance of classmate Devon, who’s wearing the same shirt. But not exactly the same, and after the class clown notices and crows that one of the boys must be sporting a knockoff, the question of “Who has the fake FUBU?” becomes a source of schoolwide intrigue.
While Earn’s stewing in his anxiety — because he knows his is the likely counterfeit — his cousin is in the principal’s office, keeping calm in the face of weighty allegations.
“Do you know why you’re here today, Alfred?” the principal asks.
“Racism,” Al says nonchalantly. “Not everybody’s gonna like me.”
A fellow student has accused him of stealing, but the charge is small stuff that Al refuses to sweat. He knows exactly which loophole to exploit in order to avoid punishment and gets off the hook with ease. From this we learn three things: Even in his youth, Al was plain-spoken and blunt; he’s a veteran at hustling contraband; and he’s long-since figured out the system and his role in it.
Earn possesses none of this prowess and that’s why his day continues to be a stomach-churner. Even as he’s flexing his brain power in biology class (“You’re pretty smart,” his cute female lab partner tells him), he shows he’s clueless when it comes to maneuvering the school’s social minefields.
“If it’s fake, everybody’s gonna roast me … forever,” he says to a friend, dreading the cruel nicknames he’ll have to endure.
Being white and, thus, not beholden to the same code of cultural conduct, the friend simply shrugs and says, “It doesn’t seem like a big deal to me. I’ve worn this shirt twice this week.”
Everyone else seems fixated on Earn’s designer drama, from the object of his affection to upperclassmen to cafeteria workers. FUBU got its start by promoting a sense of black unity — it’s an acronym for “For Us, By Us” — but that message fell on deaf ears here. Earn’s peers were determined to delineate between the haves and have-nots and in order to protect himself from being outed as the latter, he needed that name-brand as armor.
And when a single loose thread threatened to unravel everything, he turned to Alfred for counsel.
“I’m not cool like you,” Earn says, scanning the hallway for oncoming tormentors. (He tells Al the shirt came from the sale rack at Marshalls, though it looked more like a secondhand store than a discount retailer.) “What should I do? I’m freakin’ out!”
We’ve seen this dynamic before in “Money Bag Shawty,” when Earn couldn’t even buy respect. He repeatedly turns to Al to help him obtain the street cred that’s clearly been eluding him his whole life. Wise beyond his years, young Al recommends denying the shirt is phony, regardless of what any bullies claim.
“Confidence is key,” he tells him.
As ever, Earn hears Al, but doesn’t listen to him. When the resident style aficionado, Johnny, fingers him as the fake — Devon earned authenticity points for his shirt’s “Made in China” tag — Earn braces himself for a barrage of ridicule.
Which is when Al comes to his rescue, flipping the script on Johnny’s ruling with some of that aforementioned confidence (as well as a little racism).
“Of course this fool’s gonna say ‘Made in China.’ He’s Chinese,” Al says. It’s sound enough reasoning for the easily-swayed crowd and they set off hazing Devon relentlessly. (“I’m not Chinese, I’m Filipino,” Johnny clarifies, but no one cares.)
There’s no heartwarming family-bonding moment afterward. In fact, the cousins barely even share a glance after this entire exchange. Earn simply slinks off to the school bus, gray hoodie zipped all the way to the top, and watches silently as Devon takes a heaping helping of undeserved humiliation.
The next day, it’s revealed that Devon committed suicide. In addition to the hazing, he’d been coping with his parents’ divorce; the combination proved too much for him to bear. The class clown stifles a giggle, the biology teacher holds back tears and Earn just sits there wordlessly blinking, a habit he’s kept up over the years.
He arrives home to a concerned mother and aunt, who’ve heard about the death. As they clip coupons, they rattle off life advice to him and Al, who’s watching TV in the next room.
“People will bully you your whole life, if you let ‘em,” Al’s mother says. “You gotta stand up for yourself.”
“You and your cousin gotta look out for each other,” Earn’s mother adds.
As it turns out, they’ve been bound to this advice for too long and, lately, it’s been to Al’s detriment. Earn has spent years faking it, but has yet to make it. And now, seeing how long Al has had his back, it’s clear why he was reluctant to work with Earn in the first place and is eager to finally shake him off.
• The period setting meant Throwback Thursday was in full effect musically, with tracks by Tracy Chapman, The Pharcyde, the recently-departed Craig Mack, Nas (with Lauryn Hill) and even a late-’80s hit by Al B. Sure! flooding this episode.
• Though there is a broad mishmash of ’90s apparel and music, it seems safe to carbon date the year of this flashback as 1998, judging by the Outkast “Aquemini” poster hanging near Earn’s bed. That’s also the year that Daymond John’s streetwear label hit its peak.
• It’s surprising to learn that Al was enrolled in JROTC. He doesn’t seem the type to go in for all the program’s rules and rigorousness.
• There must have been some Bibby-ish shenanigans going on behind the scenes because the class clown’s haircut went from “Fresh Prince” fade during one scene to angular Bobby Brown asymmetry in the next.
• We need a Denisha minisode. The auxiliary bio class character’s 180-degree turn from being despondent and combative to vivacious and overeager deserves a story of its own.
• You are a black man in America. And when you meet people, you need to look good,” Earn’s mom cautions, instructing him to wear a suit at his upcoming piano lesson. “Your clothes are important.” Between school and home, he’s getting two different takes on respectability politics.
• A morbid hot take: Though he may have lost the taste for it by now, the coast is probably clear for Earn to wear that second FUBU shirt his mother picked up for him.
