Hanging in the foyer of Ruedi and Ann Hofmann’s art-filled home in Newburgh is a large black-and-white photograph by Richard Avedon.
Unsettling in scale as well as content, it’s a half-length portrait, larger than life-size, of a curly-haired teenage boy who stands against a white background holding up the sagging skin and shiny entrails of an eviscerated rattlesnake. The headless animal’s dark blood is spattered across the bib of his overalls; its curdlike guts squish through the fingers on his right hand. The boy’s hieratic gesture is like that of someone performing an ancient sacrifice, and his hard gaze suggests he has been doing this for much of his young life.
Not many would choose such an image to welcome visitors. Mr. Hofmann is clearly proud of it, though, and more than 100 others like it.
As master printer on Avedon’s last major project, “In the American West,” Mr. Hofmann was responsible for bringing out the myriad gray shades and material details in “Boyd Fortin,” the portrait of the 13-year-old rattlesnake skinner, and the other images of weathered, hard-bitten characters featured in the landmark 1985 exhibition and book.
It was a job, said Mr. Hofmann, that took almost three years to complete, and one that he often could begin only after his other job — supervising the technical side of Avedon’s commercial operations — was over for the day. He and his assistant, David Liittschwager, would often work late into the night at the Modernage photo lab on Avenue of the Americas in Midtown Manhattan. Their task was to emerge from the darkroom with prints that met the photographer’s exacting standards: portraits that combined razor-sharp optics with psychological intensity.
“The eyes were always critical for Dick,” said Mr. Hofmann, pointing to the boy’s creased brow. “That’s the first place he looked in a print. If he didn’t like the eyes, it didn’t matter about the rest.”
Mr. Hofmann’s respectful memories of Avedon, who died in 2004, are tempered by a perplexed irritation with the Richard Avedon Foundation, which the photographer set up in 2003 and which oversees his estate, including copyright issues and exhibitions.
Mr. Hofmann has 126 prints from “In the American West,” 104 of them sized 16 by 20 inches, and 22 sized 41 by 57 inches. The prints are pristine, having been stored in archival boxes for decades. None has suffered the dings and scratches that can happen to photographs during shipment from venue to venue for an exhibition.
The prints were Mr. Hofmann’s reward for his labor, he said, explaining that he struck a deal with Avedon in the fall of 1984: instead of money, he would be paid with a signed print of everything he produced for the project.
“Dick had no conception of what people lived on, and asking him for money was difficult,” he explained. “Being paid in prints seemed the path of least resistance.”
But there is a snag. None of Mr. Hofmann’s prints from the series is signed.
In the art market, Avedon’s photographs can be high-priced commodities. His estate is currently represented by the Gagosian Gallery. A vintage print from 1955 of his “Dovima With the Elephants” sold at Christie’s in 2010 for $1,148,910. Two weeks ago, at Art Basel in Switzerland, a print from “In the American West” of the so-called “Bee-man” was offered for sale in one booth for $155,000.
All things being equal, Mr. Hofmann’s collection, which he is eager to sell, should be worth a high multiple of that figure.
But the Avedon Foundation has refused to authenticate them. It insists that Mr. Hofmann has not provided sufficient evidence that he made these prints under the terms he claims were agreed to with Avedon. What’s more, its lawyer and director have informed Mr. Hofmann in writing that should he ever attempt to reproduce any image for purposes of sale, they will demand a penalty from him of up to $150,000 per print. And should he sell them, they will sue the buyers, citing legal precedent in Guggenheim v. Lubell, a case that dealt with a work of art that had been stolen from the Solomon R.Guggenheim Museum and sold to a buyer unaware of the theft.
For now, then, their value cannot be determined: perhaps a lot, or a little, or next to nothing. No auction house would dare to offer them, for fear of a lawsuit. Museums, eager to stay in the good graces of the Avedon Foundation, which shares a block of West 53rd Street with the Museum of Modern Art, have been similarly wary.
So as things stand, these 126 rare and impeccable photographs have become as much a worry and a burden to their owner as they are a potential bonanza.
To complicate matters, the Avedon Foundation is involved in a legal wrangle with another master printer for the photographer, Gideon Lewin. Suits and countersuits have been filed concerning who controls the copyright of photographs Mr. Lewin took of Avedon working with clients in the studio. Questions have been raised over what is a photographic “gift” and what is stolen property, and over whether a ledger, designed to catalog every exhibition print made by the Avedon studio when he was alive, is reliable.
Separate though the cases are, both expose an open secret: that Avedon, like many of the other most revered names in art and fashion photography, did not do his own printing.
Mr. Hofmann is an unassuming figure. Sixty-two years old, slight and balding, with thick-frame glasses and a gray goatee, he speaks softly and carefully, his accent faintly Southern. He makes his living now shooting for advertisers and catalogs, but he is also in demand as a printer for special exhibitions.
The son of Italian and Swiss immigrants — hence the unorthodox spelling of Ruedi — he grew up in South Carolina and Europe. Through much of the 1970s, he thought he might become a psychologist or an architect. In 1978 he enrolled at the Brooks Institute of Photography in Santa Barbara, Calif., where in 1979 a friend gave him a copy of “Avedon: Photographs 1947-1977,” the catalog for a 1978 retrospective at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
“It really changed everything for me,” Mr. Hofmann said. “I studied the book, tried to duplicate the pictures, see how they were done. I moved to New York for the express purpose of working for Richard Avedon.”
He got his wish in the winter of 1981 when he was hired as a lowly assistant. “I was told, ‘You’re going to pick up pastry, you’re going to do the floors,’” he recalled.
The Avedon studio on the Upper East Side was at the time one of the most prestigious in photography and probably the busiest, with a nonstop parade of fashion models and celebrities passing through its doors. In addition, lucrative advertising shoots for Calvin Klein and Dior kept everyone jumping.
Doing your job, said Mr. Hofmann, meant reading Avedon’s moods and anticipating his wishes. “Dick was very personable and engaging,” he said. “But he wasn’t someone with whom you had a conversation. He just expected results. And if the results weren’t what he expected, there was tension.”
The studio had an apprentice system, and Mr. Hofmann was trained by other assistants. By the end of the first week he was printing, he said, although it was some time before anything was deemed good enough to present to the boss himself. Only after he had earned his trust was Mr. Hofmann promoted.
Within six months, he was running the technical side of the studio and going on shoots with Avedon around the country, including journeys to desolate rural places where Avedon photographed the locals who would populate his magnum opus, “In the American West.”
Commissioned in 1979 by the Amon Carter Museum in Fort Worth, Tex., the venture paid Avedon $100,000 a year for five years. He and his crew traveled through 17 Western states and made portraits of 752 people. After it opened at the Amon Carter, the exhibition toured the country to wide acclaim. The catalog, published by Abrams, was a best-seller and is now a collector’s item. Mr. Hofmann left the Avedon studio in September 1985; he had agreed to stay on through the opening at the Amon Carter. A year later he opened his own studio in the meatpacking district, where he worked for 20 years.
The photographer Laura Wilson documented the project’s gestation and birth in her book “Avedon at Work: In the American West.” Published in 2003, it features several photographs of Mr. Hofmann, some in which he is holding cameras in the field for Avedon, others where he is working on exhibition prints at Modernage, a photography lab.
In support of Mr. Hofmann’s claim, and at his request, Ms. Wilson wrote a letter on April 5 this year that recalls a 1984 visit to the lab. “I was stunned by the amount of time involved, the long hours and painstaking skills necessary to do these large prints,” she wrote. “I remember saying, ‘Gosh, Ruedi, this is a lot of work. How are you being paid for all this extra work?’ Ruedi told me he was being paid with prints. Dick had agreed to give him a signed print for each image in the book and exhibition. I am clear about this, certain of the recollection.”
During our visit, Mr. Hofmann went to a desk in his dining room and read from three other recent letters written by others employed at that time, including Mr. Liittschwager and Norma Stevens, manager of Avedon’s studio for more than 30 years. They all attest that their employer and Mr. Hofmann had agreed orally to this financial pact.
The Richard Avedon Foundation disputes that any such arrangement could have taken place.
The photographer’s son, John Avedon, and John’s wife, Laura, have been mainstays of the board. Its current executive director is James Martin.
When asked to comment on Mr. Hofmann’s assertion, Mr. Martin responded by email that “no documentation proving the authenticity and ownership of even one of these prints — let alone 120+ unsigned prints — has been provided to the foundation.”
“The documentation we did review was drafted by Hoffman a decade after Avedon’s death,” he continued. “The notion that Richard Avedon knew these unsigned prints were in Hofmann’s possession is not credible given that Avedon did not conduct business in this wholesale and careless manner.” The foundation director also wrote that Mr. Hofmann had many years "during which he could have had Avedon sign, authenticate or otherwise transfer these prints if they were legitimately in Hofmann’s possession and meant as gifts or payments to him.”
Mr. Martin did not respond further. “There is nothing more to be said,” he wrote.
Mr. Hofmann has sought legal counsel but has not pursued legal action. “I’ve tried to keep things as cordial as possible,” he said. “But I’ve made it clear that I want to sell these prints.”
Ms. Stevens, once the director of the foundation, said she had tried to serve as mediator in the situation. As longtime manager of the Avedon studio and the only other living witness to what she agrees was a 1984 agreement about the prints-as-payment, she has backed Mr. Hofmann’s version of events in a pair of letters, the first written more than three years ago.
“Ruedi is a wonderful printer and a great guy,” she said by phone. “Very ethical. He did a great job.”
But as it has become apparent that the foundation would threaten to punish Mr. Hofmann financially if he tried to sell the prints, she has looked for other ways in which he might be compensated.
At one point the foundation suggested a trade: a signed print, unframed on aluminum, from “In the American West,” in exchange for his turning over the unsigned prints.
“Those things are worth a lot of money,” Ms. Stevens noted, estimating its value at $180,000. She urged him to accept the offer. Mr. Hofmann thought it insufficient.
She — and everyone else from those days — is not sure why he kept this trove of prints for decades and never asked Avedon to complete his end of the bargain. She said that he “wasn’t aggressive enough,” and added, “Maybe he thought Dick was too busy and he didn’t want to bother him.”
“I don’t know why he didn’t get them signed,” she said. “But he just didn’t. I’d like to help him. But I can’t authenticate the prints, and the person who can is dead.”
When Avedon made an arrangement with Mr. Hofmann, he could have thought he was getting the better deal. The market for photographs was then in its infancy, and his own work was not in high demand. The record price for an Avedon in 1985 — a portrait of Marilyn Monroe — was $1,100. (A vintage print of this same image sold in 2008 at Christie’s for $457,000.)
It’s possible that as he watched his prices rapidly escalate in the 1990s, Avedon realized that he had made a poor wager. He was known as a tough businessman.
Just as likely, he simply forgot about the prints in the rush of life. In any case, he never offered to sign them, and his former employee never asked him to. “Perhaps he thought the privilege of working for him was payment enough,” Mr. Hofmann said in a frosty tone — one of the few moments during our interview that he was less than reverent about his former employer.
Mr. Hofmann himself was slow to comprehend what he possessed. Not until three years after Avedon’s death did he put up for auction a signed diptych of the rancher Richard Wheatcroft, one of the leathery men “In the American West.”
A gift from the photographer, one of a handful he gave to those who had worked with him over the long span of the project, it was chosen as the cover lot for the Sotheby’s New York photographs catalog in the spring of 2007 and sold for $160,000.
Only two complete sets of signed prints from the series are known to exist: one at the Amon Carter Museum; the other at the Center for Creative Photography in Tucson, Ariz., where the photographer’s negatives are stored.
An unsigned print is not necessarily less valuable than a signed one. According to Denise Bethel, former director of Sotheby’s Photographs Department for 25 years, “it depends on the artist and the rarity of the print, and its condition.”
“I can imagine, if rare enough, that distinction, between signed and unsigned, becomes almost academic,” she said.
She cited two examples from 2006 in which Sotheby’s offered two palladium prints of Georgia O’Keeffe by Alfred Stieglitz. One sold for $1.472 million; the other for $1.36 million. Neither was signed.
“The question collectors have to ask themselves is: How many other chances am I going to have to buy these exceedingly uncommon prints?” Ms. Bethel said. "Maybe zero. So the savvy collectors aren’t going to wait for the signed ones.”
“Provided,” she emphasized as a caveat, “there is no impediment to the sale.”
Mr. Hofmann is not the only former master printer to have a contentious relationship with the Richard Avedon Foundation.
Gideon Lewin, 77, is a photographer who from 1964 to 1980 had a role in the Avedon studio similar to the one Mr. Hofmann later assumed. During his 16-year tenure, Mr. Lewin claims to have printed the photographs for all of Avedon’s exhibitions.
“He had other things to do,” Mr. Lewin said by phone from his home in Manhattan. “He was too busy with the clients. He was the hardest-working man I’ve ever seen.”
Mr. Lewin said that while teaching at the Pratt Institute in 2006, and finding that his students had only a vague understanding of what the recently deceased photographer had done, he had an idea to do a book that would “show the lighter side of Richard Avedon, very young at heart, and very funny.” It would feature the hundreds of photographs he had taken of the master at work in the studio.
“Dick encouraged me to document him,” he said. “We were very close.”
In 2009, Mr. Lewin “got serious,” did layouts and signed a contract with a publisher, Assouline, for a volume to be called “Behind the Scenes With Richard Avedon.”
Mr. Lewin said he had the full cooperation of the Avedon Foundation until he submitted his essay. In it, he had written: “Avedon never went into the darkroom. He hasn’t printed since 1950, probably.” Laura Avedon was “enraged,” he said, laughing.
She wasn’t the only one. Ms. Stevens, then the head of the foundation, was also upset by the essay. “I was horrified by what he wrote,” she said. “Gideon is very arrogant. He claims he did everything. He got a lot of praise from Dick and was paid a lot of money. But he wasn’t in charge. He is a very good commercial photographer. But that’s it.”
By 2011, the foundation had decided to block publication of the book by insisting that all of the photographs Mr. Lewin had taken, because he was still an employee of the studio, were not in his copyright but in the foundation’s.
Mr. Lewin sued the foundation, which countersued. In 2012 a New York State magistrate judge ordered mediation.
“We were about 95 percent in agreement in 2014,” said Mr. Lewin, “and then they changed lawyers. So we started all over again.”
On June 23, United States Distict Court Judge Kimba M. Wood, having been advised that Mr. Lewin and the foundation had reached an agreement in principle to settle, ordered the case closed.
Mr. Lewin said he had been allowed copyright on his own images, but that “there are several unresolved issues.”
Mr. Martin wrote in an email: “If the settlement agreement can be consummated in a timely fashion, the foundation will agree not to challenge Lewin’s assertion of copyright in approximately 10 percent of the images that he sought to obtain in this lawsuit, with the foundation not being challenged by Lewin in the remaining 90 percent. Almost all of the tangible property at issue in this case will either be returned to the foundation or distributed to institutions of the foundation’s choosing.”
What unites the two grievances is that they both make clear that the startling lucidity that characterizes an Avedon print was only partly a result of his hand. Outsourcing, though, is anything but unusual in photography, or in the history of art. Just as Rembrandt and Rubens operated studios where assistants painted the fur or the armor, leaving the faces and the virtuosic blending of the ensemble to be completed by the master, numerous photographers through the 20th century employed technicians to develop film and print negatives.
Edward Steichen, Henri Cartier-Bresson, Walker Evans, Berenice Abbott and Cindy Sherman are only a few who at some point in their careers hired others to perform this labor-intensive, unheralded and often uncredited task.
The Avedon cases underline the ambiguous importance of the printer in art photography. Yes, the impeccable prints by Mr. Hofmann were the product of Avedon’s vision. Without Avedon’s immense intelligence, energy and manipulative charm, the portraits would lack the impact and psychological complexity that make them so prized. It was his eyes that determined if Boyd Fortin’s eyes in the portrait photograph were hauntingly affective and exactly what he wanted. But doesn’t the printer, like the cinematographer on a movie, deserve to share a screen credit along with the director?
Artists’ estates have a vested interest in playing down the role of printers and assistants and in keeping unsigned copies off the market. One reason has to do with commercial self-interest: It can be confusing or difficult to sell something if multiple people deserve an unknown measure of the praise for its excellence.
But another reason, more historically minded, is for purposes of cataloging an oeuvre after an artist’s death, for separating legitimate from ersatz and for preventing fraud. After all, not much deters anyone with access to a photographer’s negatives from printing a few unauthorized copies, late at night in the lab, and secreting them out the door.
The Avedon studio hired a librarian in 1975 whose job it was to list in a ledger all editions of prints made for exhibitions.
The foundation is arguing in its case against Mr. Lewin that a number of prints in his possession were illegally made because they are not mentioned in the ledger. He disputed this allegation — “Avedon gifted me quite a few prints, some of them quite valuable,” he said — and part of his defense rests on his contention that the ledger is far from complete or accurate.
But even if Mr. Lewin’s case is settled, it may not help Mr. Hofmann. There is no mention in the ledger of the “In the American West” prints now in his house, and neither he nor Ms. Stevens, who was in charge of the studio at the time, can explain why.
To conclude our visit, Mr. Hofmann, his wife, and their friend Richard Corman (another former Avedon employee) led me on a five-mile drive to a carriage house that has become a local arts center. Newburgh has a picturesque setting along the Hudson but has been gutted by decades of unemployment. We passed blocks of boarded-up houses and broken fences.
“The city is on its knees,” said Mr. Hofmann, who last fall used this same arts center to exhibit a show of his portraits of people in the community, a “Pivotal Project,” funded by the city’s residents.
Inside on this spring day, he had papered the four walls with photocopies of his Avedon prints. The sheets were blank except for the names of people in the portraits. “Boyd Fortin,” “Red Owens,” “Sandra Bennett.”
Mr. Hofmann would like to install his collection here.
Until then, he is calling this temporary exhibition “Unsigned 126: American West Collection.” Below this title he has hung six photocopies from Laura Wilson’s book that show him assisting on “In the American West.” But neither his name nor Avedon’s appears on the walls.
He told stories about his late-night work on the project. A single exhibition print might take 45 minutes, with each part of a face or item of clothing receiving its own dose of timed light as he masked, dodged and burned. “It was like a dance,” said Ann Hofmann, whose only chance to see him some days would be at the lab.
Mr. Hofmann’s high regard for his former boss as an artist is undiminished. “Dick worked with an 8-by-10 the way others worked with a 35,” he said. “I loved going through the Amon Carter with Dick and seeing the scale.” He said Avedon “had no problem” acknowledging in public his role as the printer of the series and at an Amon Carter symposium praised his contributions.
Why did he never ask Avedon to sign them?
It’s not as if he didn’t think about this piece of unfinished business repeatedly over the years.
He hesitated in answering. “Out of too much respect,” he ventured. “Maybe lack of self-esteem.” Then he corrected himself.
“No, not lack of self-esteem,” he said. “I thought I should just wait. Dick’s life was about what he was engaged in at the moment. He had an incredible life. He was active the second he woke up in the morning, always moving forward. The agreement was there. It just wasn’t on his mind.”
To make sure that he didn’t leave the impression that he was naïve about what he owned, or where his actions had led him, he spoke more forcefully: “I’m not a lemming. I am not a simpleton.”
He paused and then laughed, with more exasperation than amusement. “I just want to be paid,” he said. “My wages were the prints. And the check isn’t even in the mail.”
