Good morning on this wishy-washy Wednesday.
Farewell, Fashion Week.
As another stretch of supermodel appearances, fairy-tale fashion shows, parties and unparalleled street style comes to a colorful close, we wondered whether there was anything we could carry with us into the fall.
So we asked a few of the designers in town — Becca McCharen-Tran of Chromat, a line worn by the likes of Madonna and Beyoncé; Adam Vanunu of Cotton Citizen, a label known for its hand-dyed garments; and Kerby Jean-Raymond of Pyer Moss, a brand based in the city — to share some style advice.
What’s a big New York City trend this season — something that you might not see elsewhere?
Ms. McCharen-Tran: “Denim in full force!”
Mr. Vanunu: “Colored denim! Something like colored denim can take off here because people don’t care to follow ‘fashion rules,’ but at the same time have an appreciation for classic American fashion staples.”
What’s one “no” we should know — a fashion faux pas you’ve been seeing in the city?
Mr. Vanunu: “Flip flops.”
Mr. Jean-Raymond: “The dramatically oversized thing is dead. The fashionable kids in the city are moving away from the messy off-the-shoulder trends and onto a more tailored but voluminous look, like wide-leg jeans and trucker jackets paired with suiting elements and skintight turtlenecks.”
Thoughts on wearing white here after Labor Day — a no, or a go?
Ms. McCharen-Tran: “No rules.”
Mr. Vanunu: “White always works in any season. It’s a super clean look and always makes a statement, especially if you’re wearing head-to-toe optic white. White doesn’t have to be boring; it can be really empowering.”
How do I transition my summer closet into fall?
Ms. McCharen-Tran: “We’re transitioning into wearing long-sleeved swimsuits as bodysuits with pants.”
Mr. Jean-Raymond: “Add some statement outerwear to your closet and plenty of boots. Layer some of the summer pieces, like wear a dress over a tee.”
What’s the color of the season in New York, and who decides?
Ms. McCharen-Tran: “You decide. Whatever color you like is your color!”
Mr. Vanunu: “This season, it’s all about a bold, but sophisticated, supersaturated color. My favorite color is a true blue, but I’m also feeling a royal purple and coral right now. Who decides? Sometimes you can catch color trends on the runway, and sometimes the runway catches color trends from what people are wearing on the street.”
Here’s what else is happening:
I want to know: Have you ever seen the rain comin’ down on a sunny day?
Today, you probably will.
We’re expecting a chance of showers this morning, and a chance of thunderstorms later, with the sun making a cameo in between.
Get used to it — more of Mother Nature’s indecisive behavior is on its way for the rest of the workweek and into the weekend.
• Primary election results: Mayor Bill de Blasio sailed to a decisive victory over Sal F. Albanese; with no Republican running in November, Eric Gonzalez effectively won the race for Brooklyn district attorney; and name recognition was key in City Council races, with the highest profile contest going to Francisco P. Moya over Hiram Monserrate.
• New Jersey is expected to approve a plan that would give Newark control over its own public schools for the first time in over 20 years. [New York Times]
• A statue of Christopher Columbus in Central Park was found covered with graffiti, its hands painted red. [New York Times]
• The Police Department has been giving tickets cyclists violating traffic laws in Greenpoint as a traffic safety strategy. [DNAinfo]
• Edith Windsor, whose Supreme Court case granted same-sex married couples federal recognition for the first time, has died. [New York Times]
• Today’s Metropolitan Diary: “Unzipping After a Big Night Out”
• For a global look at what’s happening, see Your Morning Briefing.
• The Brooklyn Book Festival, featuring events with national and international literary stars and emerging authors, continues through Sunday at various venues. Times vary. [Free]
• Children can experience Eloise at the Museum at “Eloise Après Déjeuner,” an afternoon of fancy treats, drinks and story time at the New-York Historical Society on the Upper West Side. 3 p.m. [$50]
• The food historian and cookbook writer Jessica B. Harris discusses her new memoir, “My Soul Looks Back,” at the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture in Harlem. 6:30 p.m. [Free]
• The Mulleavy sisters, the designers behind the fashion line Rodarte, join TimesTalks for a conversation at Merkin Concert Hall at the Kaufman Music Center on the Upper West Side. 7 p.m. [$40, here’s a link for $10 off with the code “NYTODAY.”]
• Yankees at Rays, 1:10 p.m. (YES). Mets at Cubs, 8:05 p.m. (SNY).
• Alternate-side parking remains in effect until Sept. 21.
• For more events, see The New York Times’s Arts & Entertainment guide.
Last month, we told you about the One Film, One New York project launched by The New York Times and the mayor’s office to unite the city under one movie.
We asked you to vote for your favorite of five films shot in New York City — and even to get creative by sharing your own picks.
The winner of the contest (drum roll, please…) was Spike Lee’s “Crooklyn,” a film exploring family life in Brooklyn in the 1970s.
The movie will be screened today — for free! — at parks and theaters across the five boroughs.
Among those locations are St. Nicholas Park in Manhattan, Fort Greene Park in Brooklyn, Lawrence Virgilio Playground in Queens, Crotona Park in the Bronx and Clove Lakes Park on Staten Island. (These screenings start at 7:30 p.m., but we recommend arriving early, with a blanket, to grab seats.)
You can search for other viewing spots near you here.
New York Today is a morning roundup that is published weekdays at 6 a.m. If you don’t get it in your inbox already, you can sign up to receive it by email here.
For updates throughout the day, like us on Facebook.
What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at nytoday@nytimes.com, or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday. 
Follow the New York Today columnists, Alexandra Levine and Jonathan Wolfe, on Twitter.
You can find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com.
