In their recent single “Drop,” the R&B sister duo Chloe x Halle are all attitude, telling a boy: “Baby, I get sick of you. You’re that same old tune I don’t ever want to hear again.”
But at Tory Burch’s show at the Whitney Museum of American Art on Tuesday morning, they did nothing but gush about what it was like to appear at fashion week, getting booked by brands like Burch and Cartier. (The sisters sang at an event for the jewelry brand earlier in the week.)
“Ms. Tory invited us here,” said Chloe Bailey, 18, wearing navy and white pants from Tory Burch’s sport line along with a matching V-neck blouse, and a blue and red jacket that looked like a cross between a blazer and a sports jersey. “We’ll be performing at her dinner tonight, which is going to be really fun. We’re just so, so excited.”
“So, so excited,” said Halle, 16, who wore a navy and white dress from the brand’s sport line.
Over the last five years, the sisters, who live in the North Hollywood neighborhood of Los Angeles (“So cute,” Chloe said), have posted their covers of Beyoncé songs like “Love on Top” and “Pretty Hurts” on YouTube. They have received millions of views, including from Queen Bey, who signed them to her management company, Parkwood Entertainment.
In April, Chloe x Halle released an EP of their own material that draws inspiration from the space age minimalism of Aaliyah and Cassie. This summer, they toured Europe with Beyoncé. In November they’ll go back on the road, with Andra Day.
How does Halle balance work and school?
“I’m home-schooled,” she said. “It’s great for my schedule, but with everything so busy, I realized I have to get ahead and work on the weekends and stuff. So that’s just something that I have to do. But I’m happy that I have that education.”
“Finish school!” her sister said, nodding.
Around 9:30 a.m., a half-hour after the Tory Burch show’s call time, the models began their march before the crowd in printed caftanlike tops and prairie skirts that recalled frontier America (think: Willa Cather by way of Lily Pulitzer).
The Bailey twins approved, saying afterward that they thought the show was “so cool.” They loved seeing how fast the clothes come out in real life.
“I’ve already got these girls in the magazine,” said Laura Brown, the recently hired editor in chief of InStyle.
More reporters arrived with more questions.
Being similar in age and size, do they steal each other’s clothes?
“Absolutely,” said Halle, who added that there is also much theft of coconut oil.
What style advice had Beyoncé provided? “Stay comfortable,” Halle said. “Stay ourselves.”
