Greetings, mother-earthlings. I signal you from the planet Phenylephrine, the foggy orbit of which I have been launched into by the unseasonable cold in my corner of our rapidly-warming globe. Fortunately, our leaders do not deny the forces that are causing these herstoric temperature spikes, and have set about taking immediate action. I am, of course, referring to our RuPresident and his armoire of realness executives.
Last week’s guest judge Courtney Love no doubt pushed the hands of the doomsday clock forward when she caterwauled that “Armageddon … may be coming!” at which the doomed room laughed and laughed. Somehow I have always known that it would be Ms. Love who would open the seventh seal.
Well, if we’re all going to die, at least we will die having seen the kind of “Drag Race” episode we live through this for. After a slightly frosty exchange between Mayhem and Monique and an icy glare from Aquaria toward The Vixen at the top of the episode, the workroom climate quickly changed as the queens were launched into two delightful challenges that set them buzzing about like endangered bees.
Commander Ru, sporting both a slight vocal strain and tinted glasses that barely concealed his somewhat puffy eyes, sent our comely crew on its first mission: a mini-challenge in which they posed for “photobombs,” to be edited into images of such supernovas of our shrinking cultural galaxy as the Jonas Brothers, Kim and Kanye and Grumpy Cat.
Miz Cracker held up her trademark saltine-shaped wig and “served right back” to an image of Venus Williams, while Dusty failed to volley an “OWN everything” joke inspired by her Oprah Winfrey shot. Aquaria crouched and held her pretty nose behind Ms. Kardashian-West’s most infamous asset, and aced the match.
Earth Mama Ru then announced the maxi-challenge by conveniently delivering some truths.
“The bad news:- Climate change is real … and the world is coming to an end,” he said “The good news: We’re throwing a ball!”
The queens were commanded to assemble three looks for “The Last Ball On Earth.” These included Alaskan Winter Realness (“Sexy bikini, fun in the sun”); Miami Summer Realness (“Something furry, to keep from freezing”); and Martian Eleganza Extravaganza (“glamour couture that will slay … on your new home planet, Mars”).
With three looks to construct from the bottom up, the workroom’s sea level rose fast, and there was simply no time to tread in the conflama that waterlogged last week’s episode.
Monét X Change seized a roll of quilted red patent leather, then quickly bemoaned its failure to stretch. Asia O’Hara, an accomplished costumer who has dressed the likes of Gladys Knight and Dolly Parton, looked on in horror as Monét freehandedly hacked at the expensive fabric “like Edward Scissorhands.”
Dusty struggled to construct her metal corset, suffering cuts, burns and bruises from hacking at and hot-gluing the rough-edged materials. Asia generously advised Monét on the best technique for tackling her tricky textile, undamming a flood of consultations with the less Singer-savvy queens, and earning her the title “the black Martha Stewart,” quickly abbreviated to “Blartha!”
Erstwhile women’s-wear student Aquaria expressed her excitement about the opportunity to prove herself as a “look queen,” and mused in a confessional that “drag is about genuinely liking what you do, and doing what you do because it’s what you like.”
“I’m like Gandhi,” she added, after a pause. Aquaria, I would love to give this to you, but your Untucked protests have been a bit on the violent side. Thus far, you’ve proven yourself to be rather more of a “dirty look queen.”
Aquaria’s frequent sparring partner The Vixen presented her shimmering softer side this week. (Her previous seemingly inexplicable rage in fact stemmed from a consciousness which required the viewing of last week’s “Untucked” to fully contextualize, and the race-drag narrative of which should have been more responsibly shaped by the story-editing team of this program.)
She smiled as she shared the sweet story of how her godmother taught her to sew by having her stitch her name into a napkin, and we learned about her reputation as a “firestarter,” her political activism and her empowering show “Black Girl Magic.” The Vixen, may I borrow that napkin? The wizened little ventricle of my contrite heart that you just stitched your name into is bleeding.
Monét, razzed by Ru for her close-cropped “pussycat” wigs, defended her working-mom style choice on the grounds of practicality. “I work six nights a week! So, sometimes it is [about] getting out the door and not worrying about flubbing with hair!” In a confessional, her New York sister Miz Cracker chimed, “Monét shows up in a romper, no-tuck-no-wig, and audiences? Eat. Her. Up.”
(Having personally consumed Ms. X Change in this preparation, I can attest that she indeed highly amuses the bouche. But in the face of a fashion challenge, as Cracker adds, “This is ‘Drag Race.’ That’s not gonna fly.”)
In the face of the coming Ru-pocalypse, the queens bunkered down and clung to each other. Blair sweetly helped a panicky Monique thread a needle. Eureka and Monet danced a “donkey kick” and heehawed with laughter. Cracker and Aquaria playfully batted shady shuttlecocks and cackled about their silly, faraway-seeming feud. Monét, in what would make a great Drunk History episode, soberly revised the history of the colonization of the Americas.
In a Sean Baker-directed remake of the “I don’t want to leave this room” scene from “Boogie Nights,” Blair confessed to Asia that she saw her as a mother figure. Asia, in turn, shared that, since her parents both passed when she was only 27 years old, “Doing drag … gave me those family connections. That’s why I really … take these moments to heart, because I don’t know when I’m gonna see y’all again.” My personal spiritual beliefs dictate that one is the architect of one’s own afterlife, and Blair-St.-Clair-I-do-declare, this entire workroom scene was an exact blueprint for mine.
Clad in every look from “Liquid Sky” at once, and half-masked by an enormous opaque violet visor that made Yoko Ono’s signature shades look like John Lennon’s, the hoarse man Ru ushered in the runway-pocalypse.
The girls were prepped, and brought a bug-out-bagful of looks. Star survivors included Aquaria in a Lucha Libre-inspired bikini; Miz Cracker in a salty mix of sea, sex and space; Kameron in a triple feature of camp, cotton-candy-chill and commedia; and The Vixen in a “Solid Gold”-medal-worthy Darcel-in-Space fantasia.
The fallen-out included Blair St. Clair, in three basic-bee costumes from the same boring Ann-Margret B-movie, and who somehow ducked and covered from the judges’ blast (this birdie should have had to say bye bye, but it seems she’s still got at least a little livin’ to do). Dusty sported an incohesive metal fairy-in-a-gas-mask story, and Monét’s gap-seamed red leather frock resembled a charred oven mitt.
The postpartum Asia, who paraded an unremarkable triptych of distractedly ball-dazzled garments, was reprimanded for spending her precious last moments shuttling too many others to safety, and not “taking care of [herself] first.” However, her buttons were sufficiently big and, on this stage at least, Asia was not a casualty in the final showdown.
Aquaria’s tender age finally dawned, and she was named the winner of the maxi-challenge, thereby scoring a double play and taking the episode. And as doomsayers have long predicted, the coasts were flooded first — the New York queens Dusty and Monét were ordered to lip sync for their lives to “Pound the Alarm” by Nicki Minaj, which sounds exactly as I imagine the post-blast tinnitus will sound.
It is with swollen Yankee pride that I report that both queens were savage, and had they been facing anyone but each other, it would have been a mercy killing. However, Monét shone brightest, in a 5-carat, marquise-cut lip sync for the ages. It was so seismic that even though Ru was doubtlessly rendered legally blind by his eyewear, you knew he could feel it, and probably even smell it. Once the judges’ screaming died down, he was inspired to croak out, “For the ladies watching from the back — that is what we call a lip-sync for your LIFE.”
It was, possibly, the best lip sync performance ever to appear on this program. Monét’s odds for winning just skyrocketed so high that I can see them from my foggy orbit — with lip-sync being the ultimate runoff in this competition, it’s hard to imagine anyone else snatching the crown. Her look may have been choppy, but, like Edward Scissorhands, she slayed in the end. And, tragically, the bruised, burned, brilliant Dusty was sent out to the rising sea.
Drag is and has always been about creating beauty, power and family in the face of danger, oppression and the threat of early death. As the very real doomsday clock ticks ever closer to eternal midnight, it’s good to know that at least some of the powers that be are preparing Ru-sponsibly. This episode served us believers a bookful of revelation.
The world is coming to an end. Throw a ball.
See you next week …?
