And the stars look very different today
David Bowie died Sunday at age 69; here, some of his most idiosyncratic and indelible looks, from his Ziggy Stardust body-stocking and Aladdin Sane stripes to his Halloween Jack eyepatch and “Let’s Dance” leisure suits. Vanessa Friedman reflected on his legacy, noting, “In a very essential way, Mr. Bowie helped make fashion writ large — fashion the system, fashion the pop culture force — the ever-mutating megalith we know today. It’s why his effect is felt not just in men’s wear but in women’s wear, too; not just in ready-to-wear, but in couture; from high to low and back again.”
Valuational baggage?
BagHunter.com, a site that sells Hermès Birkin bags, studied the investment returns for the S&P 500, gold and Hermès Birkin bags since 1980 — and determined that “historical data along with current indicators show that investing in the S&P 500 or in gold commodities brings with it a huge amount of risk and returns are heavily influenced on external factors out of the investor’s control. In comparison, an investment in a Hermès Birkin bag has shown to be safe and steady over the last 35 years, with all current indicators showing that this trend is set to continue.” But Buzzfeed’s Sapna Maheshwari points out some flawed logic, breaking down why it’s “not an apples-to-apples comparison.”
Hooray for Hedi-wood; that screwy, ballyhooey Hedi-wood
On Tuesday night, the @ysl twitter account announced the upcoming “Saint Laurent at the Palladium,” scheduled in L.A. the week of the Grammys, where Hedi Slimane will present his fall 2016 men’s wear and part one of his women’s wear collection (part two is set for Paris Fashion Week) and celebrate a decade of his photography blog. The timing was curious: in the wee hours of Wednesday morning, WWD published an article titled “Hedi Exiting YSL? Vaccarello Said in Wings.”
CrazySexySchooled
Rashida Jones released the music vid “Flip and Rewind,” a tour-de-force of ’90s R&B fashions.
Must we, TV?
“America’s Next Top Model” might return, thanks to VH1 — possibly sans Tyra Banks.
I can’t feel my face when I’m with Mary Katrantzou 
Introducing London Fashion Weekend, where Emilia Wickstead, Mary Katrantzou, Holly Fultonand Temperley London will restage their shows post-LFW for commoners. The event “offers the opportunity to reach a targeted and focused consumer audience of more than 16,000 people,” a spokesperson told WWD.
That Mid-Aughts Show
Fake Empire (the duo behind “Gossip Girl”) and Mila Kunis will produce a sitcom inspired by “The Glitter Plan,” the 2014 memoir by the Juicy Couture founders Pamela Skaist-Levy and Gela Nash-Taylor, Deadline reported.
News of the World
Jerry Hall and Rupert Murdoch are engaged.
Tweet of the Week
