Each week, the Open Thread newsletter will offer a look from across The New York Times at the forces that shape the dress codes we share, with Vanessa Friedman as your personal shopper. The latest newsletter appears here. To receive it in your inbox, register here.
Hello and happy Milan Fashion Week!
Yes, we are already on day three of week three of the fashion-month circus. Try not to get whiplash (I sometimes do.) London has come and gone. Did you even realize? It was action-packed. Fur protestors! The Tommy fest! There’s a recap here, in case you missed it.
Milan is one of those cities that tends to get a bad rap in the industry — it’s too gray, too industrial, blah blah — but personally I like it a lot. It has great food, the weather is pretty good and it’s full of hidden beauty. Not just “The Last Supper.”
Paris wears its prettiness on the outside, but in Milan, you have to work for it. Walk down the street and the sidewalk is dirty and cracked, but look up, and there are vines and window boxes overspilling greenery on almost every rooftop. The residential blocks are dotted with fortress-like closed doors, but if one of them is ever ajar, peek inside and chances are you will spy a verdant courtyard. Miuccia Prada even has a house — a whole house! — inside a courtyard. From the outside, you’d never know it was there.
Fashion people tend to move en masse: to stay in the same hotels, eat at the same restaurants, travel in the same black cars. It can make you feel a bit as if you’re in an alternate universe, and you lose the flavor of the city. Once, years ago, I worked at a magazine that put all its editors up in what was then a fashion-central hotel. Early one morning I woke up to use the (very small) pool and stumbled, bleary-eyed, upon the model Audrey Marnay frolicking at 7 a.m. in a white bikini.
It was enough to make anyone want to go off-piste.
Now I stay at the same place every season: a B&B called 3 Rooms that is part of a restaurant/shop/bookstore/gallery complex called 10 Corso Como. When I leave my room to get my dinner, so I can cart it back upstairs to eat while I sit at my computer, I see all these incredibly chic people — and I don’t know who any of them are.
That may sound like a small thing, but in fashion month, it’s an education. Not to mention a useful reminder of the world outside. And a handy shortcut to perspective. (For other such experiences, I highly recommend T’s guide on where to eat, sleep and shop in Milan.)
For those who are interested in the world beyond the city, however, take a plunge into this piece on Italian Vogue’s new editor, go on a studio visit with the man who dresses Melania Trump — and join us for a trip inside Dior’s archives.
Next stop: Paris. À plus tard.
Every week on Open Thread, Vanessa will answer a reader’s fashion-related question, which you can send to her anytime via email or Twitter. Questions are edited and condensed.
Q: Why do the models never smile on the runway? — Shelley, New Rochelle
A: This is a perennial question, and the truth is I’ve been in shows where the models were instructed to smile (Sonia Rykiel used to ask them to skip and jump, too), and the grins became such rictuses on their faces they started to look a little psychotic. It was worse than the frowns.
The general idea, however, comes from the belief among many designers that the model should not really distract from the clothes; her face should be a blank slate, on which the personality of the collection, as opposed to the personality of the girl, can be painted. Interestingly, these days there is an alternate school of thought on the rise, led in part by a man called Ivan Bart at IMG Models, which holds that models with personality are easier to relate to, and hence sell more clothes, so we’ll see if that changes anything.
On a practical level, though, I have always thought the frowns were a natural byproduct of the situation. If you were walking down a runway, scrutinized and judged by hundreds, in front of a clutch of screaming photographers, wearing winter clothes in summer and summer clothes in autumn, probably terrified you were going to twist an ankle because your shoes didn’t fit right, wouldn’t you be kind of grumpy, or at least defensive? I’m pretty sure I would. — VANESSA FRIEDMAN
