The ghostly girls in their giant garb (plus Lady Gaga) came stomping into the big white space on skyscraper platforms, eyes and lips outlined in black, shoulders swallowed up by oversize black sorority sweatshirts spotted with sparkling spider webs.
Exaggerated lacy vinyl skirts bloomed around bony hips, and oily, iridescent feathers bristled at the neck. Silhouettes were as attenuated as a pen and ink drawing or drowned in enormous volumes; glittering rats chased their tails around Victorian coats; phantom hands reached across taffeta gowns; satin cracked from side to side.
Imagine Edward Gorey meets the Lady of Shalott, and you’ll get an idea of Marc Jacobs, fall 2016.
The fall shows began in the brawling aftermath of the New Hampshire primary and ended in the shadow of the South Carolina Republican primary and the Nevada Democratic caucus. The national dialogue has taken a turn for the macabre. Mr. Jacobs just designed for it. And brilliantly.
He also took his bow in a customized black sequined Hillary for President “Made for History” T-shirt, a version of which he has made for Mrs. Clinton to sell in her online store (and a version of which he made, also in sequins, for Anna Wintour, which she was proudly wearing in the front row), in case you were wondering if (a) he was really thinking about this sort of thing; and (b) where his allegiance lies.
Mr. Jacobs’s particular skill has always been sensing which way the sociocultural wind is blowing and translating that into clothes. This time, not just when it comes to the general population, but fashion itself. He set his show to silence, broken only by the occasional echoing chime, a track created by the Japanese rock star Keiji Haino, who focuses on what Mr. Jacobs’s crib sheet characterized as the “haunted space between the notes.”
It was metaphorically the tune of the week.
There’s a vacuum at the core of New York fashion. It’s hard to decide what defines the city’s aesthetic: politics or art or fantasy or business or what; a little bit of everything that adds up to no cohesion at all. There is a lot of talk of generational shift (it’s a trend, and the collections are an echo chamber), but the ground is still moving.
Ralph Lauren and Calvin Klein are brands that once crystallized the American aesthetic (a.k.a. sportswear) for the external world. The former still does, to a certain extent, though at a time when actual sportswear has infiltrated wardrobes writ large, that term no longer means what it once did. Mr. Lauren, however, has not revised his interpretation. He’s grooving in the comfort zone he established decades ago.
Witness his greatest-hits parade of 50 shades of taupe — in cashmere and silk and suede and flannel; culottes and blanket shawls; herringbones and Fair Isle knits — which evolved into a series of little black dresses (in leather, with a lace bow; in velvet, with a Komodo dragon frill rising to the neck).
Those in turn gave way to glam-rock brocade jackets and silver-washed denim, until it culminated in a series of velvet evening gowns: pleated, jewel-toned and soignée. Pleasantly, if not excitingly, familiar.
Meanwhile, Calvin Klein, under the creative director Francisco Costa, has increasingly moved away from its reductivist roots, exploring the tension between masculine and feminine, the rough and the refined.
See exaggerated men’s trouser suits in silk wool, the seams topstitched and unfinished, suspenders dropped to frame the hips; four-tone plaid silks, grungy and polished at the same time; fox and coyote photo-printed leather and sleeveless sheaths; and a series of starburst-pleated dresses inset, at the belly button or hip, with large slices of polished agate.
The oppositions were intriguing, but neither brand dominates the aesthetic conversation the way it once did. Perhaps it’s impossible in a world of increasingly splintered style tribes. But it’s hard not to wish for the clarion call of a new way to dress that might make a woman think: Yes! That’s who I am now.
For a designer, there opportunity lies. At least some efforts are being made to seize it.
So while Boss Women, where the artistic director Jason Wu has settled on architecture as his guiding principle, may be making a bid for the white-collar professional, building a wardrobe of nicely structured suits (this time ’round in cream and black, zipped-up and collarless, flared at both hem), things took a more free-form detour via sinuous rivers of fabric needle-punched into or folded onto dresses and tunics, and fil coupé re-embroidered blooms contrasting with buttoned-up black and olive and beige.
And at Proenza Schouler, the designers Jack McCollough and Lazaro Hernandez said they were thinking about artists like Frank Stella and Richard Serra, and the whole idea of process: How you get from here to there.
What began with generous crepe trousers under a narrow-shouldered curving jacket encasing the lines of the body segued into skinny ribbed-knit turtlenecks laced up the center and left to flow over the hips. Then it became skinny ribbed-knit dresses bound at the waist and torso by crisscrossing bands, which then became dresses patchworked from different gauges and shades of pointillist yarns, gaping a bit here and there, which then became slip dresses pieced together from bands of silk, the edges not entirely aligned.
The result walked a thin line between provocation and practicality, at least for the most part (eyelash fringing on the cocktail slips and a paint-splatter quasi-floral lost its balance), suggesting the beginnings of a new shape, literally, for the old idea of power dressing. One that reflects the difficulty of holding things together, but rejects the idea it is no longer possible.
We can always hope.
