Alexander Wang likes to make a spectacle during New York Fashion Week, whether it’s hosting blowout parties or forcing fashion editors to trek out to far-flung locations.
This week was no different. Last Wednesday, editors and buyers received a cryptic invitation to something called #Wangfest, with instructions to show up at “9:30 p.m. sharp” last night at a dank warehouse at 90 Scott Avenue in Bushwick, Brooklyn. 
Unbeknown to them, they would not be the first to see Mr. Wang’s new collection. In this season’s biggest and logistically complicated fashion show, Mr. Wang staged not one but three separate runway shows.  
The first two took place on undisclosed street corners of downtown New York, with models and other backstage professionals transported on #Wangfest buses from the designer’s headquarters on lower Broadway. 
For the people that happened to stumble upon the guerilla-style fashion show it seemed impromptu. But in New York City, nothing is as spontaneous or random as it seems. It was actually a meticulously planned, though sometimes chaotic affair, with the details of the night kept under wraps from Mr. Wang’s devoted flock until the last moment. Here's a play-by-play of how the night went down. 
Backstage at Alexander Wang’s headquarters, models were having their makeup done, wearing black robes and shirts designed for the occasion. Sohyun Chung, 22 (at left), and EZ Lee, 20, sat for a photo after having a smoke break outside, where they also passed the time by dancing. “We’re from Korea so we’re just dancing K-pop,” EZ said. “It’s like a point dance.”
Candice Swanepoel (above left) had her makeup done by Niko Lopez from Nars, who added shimmer to her eyes and cheekbones. “She’s a beach bombshell so she had me add a bit more bronzer,” he said. Afterward, he took a selfie with her (right). 
The commotion outside started drawing a crowd. “We’re Alexander Wang fans,” said Sonia McKay (with pink bag), who had just left a nearby spa with her sister, Carla McKay (in blue dress). “I’m hoping to see what’s the new fashion for this fall.” 
The production team reveals the “#wangfest” logo stenciled on the side of a bus.  The crowd, who had been waiting for about an hour, started cheering.
Models, wearing the new Alexander Wang collection, begin boarding the bus, pausing for photographs. The event was live-streamed on alexanderwang.com.
The bus makes a turn on Spring Street, en route to the first runway location. Richie Friendly, a bar owner and motorcyclist enthusiast, enlisted five friends (two of whom are shown above) to help escort the bus through traffic. “One guy recommended that I could do this,” he said.  “So I called up my guys.” 
The bus pulls up to a bodega at Broome Street, where about 50 Wang devotees, who got advance word of the location, were waiting along with more people that stumbled upon the scene.  One of those people being Fei Chong and her 6-year-old daughter, Cassandra, who had never been to a fashion show, but was really hoping that Minnie Mouse would be in it. “Keep everybody on the sidewalks,” a robust man in a suit yelled. “They are pulling up right now!”
Kaia Gerber’s Lucite Alexander Wang heel hit the pavement; she was the first of 32 models to come off the bus. "Kaia, Kaia," the crowd started to chant. “Yassssss queen,” one person yelled. "I follow her on Instagram," another said.   
The models walk the length of the block, turn around and reboard the bus. The crowd is in disbelief. "I’m overwhelmed," said Nathan Rodrigues, who was visiting from England and  having dinner at a vegan restaurant. “I got Bella and Kendall,” said his friend, who was reviewing the photos on his camera.  
The bus neared the second runway location at 51 Astor Place, escorted by Mr. Friendly’s motorcycle gang.
Kendall Jenner sported a tiara that read, “Wang Over” as she walked in the night’s second show, near Cooper Union and New York University. “Kendall!” a group of students yelled.
Mr. Wang (left) took his customary hair-swinging victory lap after the models walked. “I feel like I’m at an exclusive party right now,” said Dylan Toss, 19, who wore his “good shirt from Target.” “We’ve got to go to more fashion shows.” “I gave him a high-five,” said Anastasia MacEwen, 19 (shown above reaching out her arm), a sophomore from N.Y.U. “It was supercool.”
Meanwhile, on the sidewalk outside the Bushwick warehouses, fashion editors, buyers and celebrities were growing a little impatient, waiting for the #Wangfest to arrive. 
Those waiting included (from left): Tinashe, Maeve Reilly, Sofia Richie and Kozue Akimoto.  “Anwar Anwar,” Ms. Ritchie said when she saw Anwar Hadid, the 18-year-old brother of Gigi Hadid. Nearby, Kris Jenner and Kim Kardashian West (above, right), who wore an Alexander Wang blazer, were surrounded by security guards. 
The bus finally arrived. Ms. Kardashian West took out her phone and got ready to Snapchat her sister “Kenny” for her walk.
The third and final show started about an hour late for an invite-only crowd.
The show ended and the crowd broke into chaos as everyone started rushing toward the after-party space. “I think this is the last day of my life,” said one person in the crowd. “Oh my god, this is out of control,” another said.  
The party went until 3 a.m. and included a bouncy castle, 1,750 doughnuts and performances by Asap Ferg, Vince Staples, Cardi B, Ja Rule and Ashanti.  
