At the Pyer Moss show at Milk Studios on Saturday, a quintet played classical music in hospital gowns, a jacket had the message “You don’t have any friends in LA” written across the breastplate, and the final model held a sign that said: “My demons won today. I’m sorry.”
In case you couldn’t tell, the theme of the show was depression, although the Pyer Moss designer, Kerby Jean-Raymond, was quick to point out afterward that the idea was at least partly ironic, a tragicomic “Coen Brothers movie”-like device he used to spoof the often self-serious fashion world that he sees himself as being outside of.
The show was styled by the R&B singer Erykah Badu, who sat in the front row, wearing a blue jumpsuit-like outfit and a black chauffeur’s hat. Her hair was done in pigtails, and she wore orange nail polish on one hand and yellow on the other.
She called this discordance the “double binding of two conflicting ideas that leads to depression,” and it was hard to know what she meant or if she was kidding.
After all, this is a woman who in early February described her collaboration with Mr. Jean-Raymond as “almost like Picasso inviting Monet over to his house to help him add a little blue or green,” and then on the day of the show professed to have no memory of saying any such thing.
“Who said that?” she said, sitting backstage with Mr. Jean-Raymond after the show. “I think I was just being cynical. It was probably the last interview of the day.”
Anyway, the collaboration got its start about a year ago, when Ms. Badu borrowed some of Mr. Jean-Raymond’s clothes for a string of press appearances and then refused to return them.
Rather than being angry, Mr. Jean-Raymond was amused and asked her to collaborate with him on his show.
And although Ms. Badu said she “doesn’t follow fashion per se,” she is pleased to work with anyone whose values are “bravery, honesty and fearlessness.”
Which is how she said she views Mr. Jean-Raymond, whose last collection had models walking around in blood-spattered footwear as a movie played about police brutality and racism.
“How do you feel?” Ms. Badu asked after the show, clasping his hand in hers.
“I feel amazing,” he said, giving her a little smile.
